Brian Molefe. Picture: ROBBIE TSHABALALAIn a break with tradition, Eskom chief executive Brian Molefe on Friday tendered his resignation from the utility, scoring a rare victory for good corporate governance. I have, in the interests of good governance, decided to leave my employ at Eskom from January 1 2017, said Molefe in a statement e-mailed by the electricity producer. I do so voluntarily indeed, while admitting to no wrongdoing. In October, Molefe was fingered by the public protector, in a report titled State of Capture , for his close proximity to the controversial Gupta family, who have in the past two years amassed billions of rand in contracts with Eskom.Molefe s name appears an incredible 71 times in former public protector Thuli Madonsela s report in the investigation into whether President Jacob Zuma and other state entities, including companies, acted improperly and unethically in their dealings with the Gupta family.The report lists no fewer than 69 mobile phone calls between Molefe and Ajay Gupta and Ronica Ragavan (a director of Gupta businesses) during the period in which Gupta-controlled Tegeta Resources was negotiating to buy Optimum Colliery, which supplies Eskom with coal. During this period, Eskom paid Tegeta more than R1.1bn for coal.Asked last week what he was discussing with a supplier to the company he was heading, Molefe declined to comment, saying he is still taking legal advice on how to respond to the report. He denied any wrongdoing.Under Molefe s leadership, Eskom stands accused of bending over backwards to afford the Guptas sweetheart deals, including paying it upfront for services it would render to the utility. The only entity which appears to have benefited from Eskom s decisions with regard to Optimum was Tegeta, which appears to have been enabled to buy all the shares held in Optimum, said Madonsela in her report.Other coal suppliers to Eskom complained they were not afforded similar treatment.Madonsela s report, which is legally binding unless overturned by a court review, recommended that a commission be set up to probe whether any corruption took place in Eskom s dealings with the Guptas. Madonsela also made similar findings against Transnet, of which Molefe was chief executive until April 2015 when he joined Eskom.The Transnet contracts in question were entered into with the Guptas during the period Molefe was chief of the logistics utility.In his resignation letter, Molefe said: I am confident that, when the time comes, I will be able to show that I have done nothing wrong and that my name will be cleared. Molefe s departure is set to focus the spotlight on the board, under whose supervision he worked. Chaired by Ben Ngubane, who was also fingered in the report for possible conflict of interest, the Eskom board will have to prove it played its supervisory role diligently, and that at all times it acted in the best interests of Eskom. Ngubane last week slammed the State of Capture report as speculative .The Eskom board says it regrets Molefe s departure.