Shaun Abrahams. Picture: GALLO IMAGES/AFP/GIANLUIGI GUERCIAIt speaks volumes that the rand immediately strengthened by about 30c to the US dollar as Shaun Abrahams, the bumbling national director of public prosecutions, tied himself in knots trying to explain why he was withdrawing fraud and theft charges against finance minister Pravin Gordhan.It was a dramatic U-turn. After all, it was only three weeks ago, on October 12, that Abrahams stood in the same spot, arguing fiercely why he was right to prosecute Gordhan.Economically, that decision a few weeks back was disastrous: the rand plunged to R14.49 to the dollar, bank stocks shed R50bn in value almost overnight, and bond yields spiked.Analysts were adamant that unless Abrahams was dead right about Gordhan, it was an immensely foolish gamble to take with the country s economy when ratings agencies were mulling a possible downgrade.In the end, it turned out Abrahams was dead wrong. On Monday, he backpedalled, saying he was satisfied that "Gordhan did not have the requisite intention to act unlawfully", which is why the charges would be dropped.It should be deeply distressing to the country that before deciding to derail the economy three weeks ago, Abrahams hadn t done this analysis of Gordhan s intention a key element that must be proven with any crime.This makes the prosecutorial service look dangerously amateurish. The judgment of Abrahams, the head of the unit, has been shown to be deeply flawed an assessment only underscored when he told journalists that he didn t see the withdrawal of charges within days as a "blunder"."I certainly do not owe anybody an apology," he said. And he would not resign, he added.He certainly ought to. At best, you could see the debacle as dangerous incompetence on the part of the prosecutions service. At worst, it fuels the perception that the charges were trumped up to suit SA s politicians particularly President Jacob Zuma. Either way, it is a deep stain on the integrity of the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA).Asked about the economic ramifications of his initial prosecution, Abrahams snapped: "Does the economy depend on one man?"Well, since his U-turn this week, the evidence would suggest that the fate of the finance minister is indeed crucial to an economy. The rand had strengthened to R13.50/$ at the time of writing, and bank stocks had surged.Clearly, Abrahams cowboy approach to the law means he spends little time considering the consequences of taking premature or ill-considered decisions.It might seem that after the fall in the rand and bank shares a few weeks back, this week s recovery in the currency means that in the final analysis, not much harm has been done. This isn t so: for the ratings agencies, it will only reinforce the perception that some of our institutions can no longer be trusted to make the right decisions. And if these agencies are looking to assess the level of "political noise", the NPA s stunt will harm our cause.Of course, Gordhan isn t off the hook yet. There is still the possibility that the NPA, scalded by its embarrassing retreat, may yet bring a case against him for his role in the so-called rogue unit created at the SA Revenue Service while he was commissioner. Let s hope it does a better job assessing his culpability, because it looks as though Gordhan has nothing to fear there either.Abrahams ham-fisted prosecution means his future is now in the balance. Asked pointedly whether he was embarrassed or disappointed, he replied: "I don t really want to answer that question. I certainly don t want to answer that question."That s because he knows the answer. And so does the rest of the country.