When retailers stop saying they re "cautiously optimistic" you know the brown stuff has hit the proverbial fan.They ve been decidedly downbeat in their commentary, tone and cadence over the past few months (that s what they re saying and how they re saying it).I counted the words "challenging", "pressure" and "uncertain" at least 18 times across five Sens statements.Remember that for a lot of retailers, the make or break of their year is largely dependent on their second-half performance because of Christmas.We re now on the cusp of the festive trading season and signs mostly point to carnage.Just one thing: Father s Day was barely over, then came the pumpkins and already Xmas tinsel was up in a few stores in late September.There s a term for this much-derided retail practice. It s called Christmas Creep: a bit of marketing trickery for early bird shoppers and more pointedly, a clever way for retailers to lengthen the selling interval for seasonal merchandise (an obvious profit booster, if ever there was one).Back to what I was saying about the trading environment. Truworths issued the mother of all trading statements recently it was, well, horrid.Its share slipped 8%, taking others like Woolworths and The Foschini Group with it.If you strip out inflation, acquisitions and new stores, sales volumes are down something like 20%.No-one expected the figures to be as bad as they were. Now, their half-year numbers are only due next February, so we ll have to wait for more detail until then, but it s clear that consumers have buckled under the strain. Its hellava competitive too; there s a trade-down war with Pepkor, H&amp;M and Cotton On eating everyone s lunch.We re likely to see more evidence of this next week when Mr Price reports its half-year figures.Management is highly skilled no one can argue otherwise but at least four analysts I ve chatted to are concerned about their business model.If you remember, they issued a dismal trading update in September (followed by a rather painful 30-minute management teleconference, which left most listeners unconvinced of a short-term recovery).There s no rabbit that retailers can pull out of their hats this Christmas.Consumers are more discerning and price-conscious than they ve been in a long time. This means more bargain hunting as frugal shoppers try to make their rand stretch. It might just be another one where they spend mostly on food, booze and "experiences", rather than clothing and big-ticket items.Fire saleI received a barrage of e-mails from market commentators having a giggle at the "0% OFF. WE ARE HERE TO STAY. Too good to discount," ad in a national newspaper last Friday. It was placed by Stuttafords, which in case you ve been living under a rock, is in business rescue. Understandably, the chain, which has become synonymous with mega-discounting, needs to placate suppliers and make sure staff do not flee, this as most punters say its chances of survival are slim. Curious though, that a company in severe financial straits has extra cash to spend on frivolity.One can always count on plain-speaking landlords though. Some quipped that the only time Stuttafords trades well, is during its sales. Meow.