Picture: THINKSTOCKThe SA rugby nightmare continues. Only one of the six SA franchises qualified for the Super Rugby semifinals this season. The Springboks suffered historic losses to Ireland and Argentina, as well as a landmark 42-point defeat to New Zealand at home.Last Saturday, the Boks went down 37-21 at Twickenham to record their first loss to England since 2006. SA rugby supporters have been forced to endure one horror after another in 2016. The bad news is that the nightmare is far from over.The Boks began their four-match tour of Europe with a disappointing 31-31 draw to the Barbarians on November 5. While they went into the tour-defining test against England with a depleted squad, more was expected of a team with such a fearsome physical reputation.As it was, the Boks lacked punch and attitude at the collisions, and were comprehensively outmuscled by a spirited and well-coached England combination. The Boks defence, which leaked nine tries and 57 points in that record defeat to the All Blacks last month, was once again breached all too easily and four tries were conceded at Twickenham. The scoreline did not reflect the extent of their inferiority.The backward SA rugby system is partly to blame for the national side s rotten results. All the power lies with the unions and the franchises, who do little to manage top players with the Boks in mind. It s no coincidence that the Boks are missing the equivalent of a full squad at the moment. Poor management at Super Rugby level has contributed to most of those injuries.That said, Allister Coetzee and his coaching staff must take some responsibility. Past Bok coaches were similarly limited by the system, and still managed to field competitive teams that maintained a high standard of play. Coetzee and company may find it hard to redeem themselves in the matches that remain this season.The Boks will tackle Italy in Florence on Saturday. Their final match of the year is against Wales in Cardiff on November 26. They need to win both these matches if they re to finish 2016 with a 50% record.The Boks have recorded an annual return of less than 50% only twice in the professional era (45% in 2002 and 42% in 2006). So far, Coetzee s Boks have won four of their 10 tests for a win record of 40%.Since the start of the professional era, only two coaches have produced a win record of worse than 50% during their first year in charge: Rudolf Straeuli (45% in 2002) and Carel du Plessis (38% between June 10 and August 23 1997). If the Boks lose even one of their tests over the next two weeks, Coetzee will finish the season with a success rate of 42%. It would place him among the least successful Bok coaches in the professional era.