Picture: ISTOCKLet s face it, many of us relish the thought of a smart system that opens the bedroom blinds and switches on the coffee machine when the morning alarm sounds.In a rapidly changing technological world, that simple scenario is not far off.And it can get more sophisticated. A Star Trek-type voice-controlled virtual assistant (such as Amazon s Echo) can play a song, answer questions, control lights and thermostats and even order an Uber or a pizza. It can read audiobooks and provide one with a quick news or traffic report.Local firms are only just beginning to embrace the potential of devices that talk to each other referred to as the Internet of Things (IoT). Its possibilities are endless.But can SA companies keep pace with changing tech trends?Nine out of 10 SA companies surveyed by Vodafone admit that IoT will be critical to their growth. They also recognise that to get real value from IoT will require investment in time and money. The weak economy has put pressure on companies to find new ways to grow, and the IoT could assist.Few firms have begun to invest. One that has is Vula Telematix, which is bringing a network to SA it believes will enhance service delivery. Vula Telematix CEO Max Makgoale sayshis network can enable people s devices to collect and transmit information that can help city managers.The information can, for example, help map traffic blockages or detect burst water pipes. The system could ultimately improve traffic flow, reduce water losses or make the electricity grid more reliable, often without much human intervention, says Makgoale.The network uses patented technology from US firm Inguna. Vula Telematix is also running pilots in Tanzania and Angola.Makgoale describes IoT as "the new wave of the Internet". Many companies should be using it to innovate, he says .The industries that have used IoT the most include energy and mining, where sensors are used for example to monitor methane levels in mines to improve safety. Some power companies have used Internet-enabled smart meters to measure power usage and provide feedback to consumers.In health care, sensors linked to a patient s smartphone can monitor vital signs and upload all the data it collects.Research firm Gartner estimates the number of connected things will reach 21bn by 2020."We can expect the amount of data transmitted from all these devices to grow at breakneck speed. Some estimates are that connected devices will send over 500zettabytes of data per year by 2019, up from 135ZB in 2014," says Gareth Rees, leader of the Deloitte Digital Transformation practice. A zettabyte is one trillion gigabytes.Almost half of SA companies interviewed by Vodafone plan to launch IoT solutions in the next 12 months. Vodacom managing executive for IoT Deon Liebenberg says the survey shows that companies want to adopt IoT.He believes socioeconomic and business challenges are forcing SA companies to be more creative than global firms. "Our unique socioeconomic challenges are a key driver of the innovation and creativity in many IoT solutions that have been deployed in this country. This is why IT leaders see the adoption of IoT as being more critical to their future success."Alcatel regional manager for Southern Africa Ernst Wittmann says that with all these devices connecting to the Internet mobile operators will need to keep investing in capacity."They will need to lift their standards by rolling out LTE/4G [networks] more broadly and planning a roadmap to 5G. Not only will the world be full of connected devices, but many devices will depend on efficient, fast connections."