Hywel George. Picture: HETTY ZANTMANThe Welsh are subject to stereotyping on films and TV. When they aren t playing rugby (and sometimes even when they are) they are said to combine charm with shiftiness.So I was concerned when Old Mutual Investment Group boss Diane Radley appointed Welsh wizard Hywel George as head of investments. Radley, who stepped down two weeks ago, proved to be an excellent delegator and, after George s appointment, effectively became a constitutional monarch, giving the opening speeches at conferences and cutting ribbons.George was not given the whole empire, just the listed-market businesses. In fact, the business in which Old Mutual is streets ahead of its competitors in SA is in alternatives, which still report to Paul Boynton.This has a healthy R25bn in infrastructure, R21bn in private equity and R12bn in impact funds such as schools and affordable housing. But George has enough to do overseeing the equity, multiasset and quantitative shops, as well as debt house Futuregrowth the enfant terrible.George has deployed his Welsh political skills in several ways.One was to boot out one of the boutiques, Electus, in the most charming way possible.He does not think there is room for more than one equity boutique in the shop, so the flag carrier is now Old Mutual Equities, run by Peter Linley.Neil Brown and Richard Hasson of Electus are independent fund managers by temperament. I warned them that the end game for Electus was a managed separation from Old Mutual Investment Group; they had already negotiated a higher proportion of the equity than the other shops.But George and Radley also forced Electus to hand back the emerging-markets business it had developed the right move in terms of Old Mutual s corporate interests, but a disappointing way to treat colleagues.A lot more significant in the long term is the way George s persuasive skills managed to get three analysts to leave Coronation to join Old Mutual.Future plansI m not sure I would want to work at the forbidding Old Mutual offices in Pinelands, which I tend to confuse with Pollsmoor though I think that at Old Mutual you are sometimes let out at night.At Coronation the names of these three were not those you see when the titles start rolling after a film; theirs would appear more towards the end.They are Pieter Hundersmarck, David Cook (not the Actis private equity executive) and Kyle (believe it or not) Wales. They will make up the new global (developed markets) equities team.George says he has several ambitions. He didn t leave the big bucks of Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley just to enjoy the quality of life in the Western Cape, though that has made the move a bit sweeter.He plans to double the market share of third-party business, which is now between 5% and 7%, and he wants to create a strong pan-African business, listed and unlisted. The third leg is to create a suite of global products run from Cape Town.George says the house has already proved that it can run emerging-market money, and he has no doubt that it can also run competitive all-countries funds.It will involve a lot of travelling, he says, but the former Coronation team members are only too eager. And who can blame them the less time in the Pinelands Pollsmoor the better.