Picture: GALLO IMAGESIn mid-November last year a pilot employed by the Gupta brothers, Ajay, Tony (Rajesh) and Atul, walked into the office of Robbie Irons, a director of the Oppenheimer family s aviation company, Fireblade.The company had been bogged down in red tape for years in trying to get its seven-star airport terminal at OR Tambo declared a new international port of entry, a critical requirement for its profitability. Reasons for the delays seemed unfathomable, especially in light of approvals from dozens of state entities. Until the Gupta pilot pitched up.In court papers served on home affairs minister Malusi Gigaba last week, Irons outlines what he says the pilot told him.The pilot who wishes to remain anonymous had just flown back from Moscow in the Guptas Bombardier Global 6000. On board, he said, were Mpumalanga premier David Mabuza, who d been in Russia to be treated for poisoning, President Jacob Zuma s son Duduzane Zuma and his business partner Rajesh Gupta.Mabuza later confirmed that Duduzane Zuma had offered him a lift on the Gupta jet.According to Irons affidavit, Rajesh Gupta had asked the pilot to convey the message that Fireblade would not be granted approval for international flights because it had the wrong black empowerment partners. If Fireblade chose an "appropriate" partner, which the pilot "was made to understand (was) an entity associated with the Gupta family, Mr Gupta could guarantee that the Fireblade application would receive ministerial approval within three days and Fireblade s problems would go away ." Fireblade didn t bite and still hasn t been granted approval. The company insists this is no coincidence. In its papers it argues that when the Guptas realised they weren t getting a slice of the action they put Denel under pressure to ensure Gigaba didn t declare their airport terminal a new port of entry. Denel leases the premises to Fireblade.The terminal s business model is dependent on being allowed to service international flights. Instead it s haemorrhaging money. The company is paying a full staff complement and a monthly rental of R1.4m to Denel as though it were fully operational. It has suffered operating losses, in the past three years up to the end of July, of R162.7m.The court papers show Gigaba and Denel have flip-flopped several times in approving the project. Fireblade claims this is a direct result of pressure exerted on Denel by the Gupta family.In October 2012 Denel offered Fireblade its "full support" to operate an international terminal on leased premises at OR Tambo.In March 2013 Fireblade lodged an application with Naledi Pandor, at the time minister of home affairs, for "in-house customs and immigration services co-located with the departure and arrivals facilities" for their terminal.In November 2013 Fireblade signed a lease agreement with Denel to use its premises as a terminal, complete with customs and immigration services. The Airports Company SA granted its approval in March 2014 with other departments and state entities following suit.All that remained was for the home affairs minister (Gigaba) to grant his approval and declare it a new port of entry. But this wasn t forthcoming despite several entreaties from Irons, Nicky Oppenheimer and Fireblade director Manne Dipico (a former premier of the Northern Cape).Gigaba raised several objections, ranging from outstanding security concerns to his department s lack of funds. The Oppenheimers offered to cover the cost of border control services and, as it appears from a letter from the national aviation security committee dated November 2014, addressed all outstanding security issues.In a flurry of letters between May and September 2015 Fireblade pointed out it had complied with "every government stakeholder approval process" only to be fobbed off again.At the same time important changes were taking place at Denel, whose board was almost entirely replaced by public enterprises minister Lynne Brown. The only member of the previous board she retained was Johannes "Sparks" Motseki, who once described himself as a close friend of Duduzane Zuma s and who has business ties with the Guptas.One of the first acts of the new Denel board was to suspend its CEO, Riaz Saloojee, shortly before forming a controversial partnership with the Gupta-linked company VR Laser Asia. Saloojee said later he would never have approved the partnership, describing the Hong Kong-registered VR Laser Asia owned by close Gupta business associate Salim Essa as a "letterbox company" with no experience or footprint in the Asian arms market. Its parent company in SA is owned by Duduzane Zuma and the Guptas.Saloojee, who took a golden handshake last week after being suspended with full pay for over a year without being charged or disciplined, was replaced by acting CEO Zwelakhe Ntshepe in September 2015.Not long afterwards the Gupta pilot found himself being asked to pass on a message to Irons that Fireblade needed an empowerment partner acceptable to the Guptas or it could kiss its international status goodbye.Fireblade didn t oblige. A month later, in December 2015, Fireblade was informed that Denel had undergone "a dramatic change of heart" and had lodged an objection with Gigaba again citing security concerns.But on January 12 this year Ntshepe made another about-turn and retracted his objection in a letter to Gigaba, who also endorsed the project at a meeting held in Pretoria on January 28 with the Fireblade directors, including Irons and chairman Nicky Oppenheimer.Minutes of this meeting show Gigaba apologised for the delays and "confirmed he had signed this approval".But barely a fortnight later Daniel Mantsha, the new Denel chair, wrote to Gigaba to object again and raised the same security concerns. He later explained to Fireblade he wanted all its directors to be vetted by the State Security Agency (SSA). Fireblade deemed Denel s security concerns "spurious", especially since the aviation security committee had given the project the green light over a year earlier. Nevertheless Fireblade s directors agreed to undergo security vetting by the SSA.Then Irons received a message from the Gupta pilot on April 29."Hi Robbie. Hope you are well," the pilot said in a WhatsApp, going on to describe "a comment" another Gupta pilot had overheard "during a flight he did for VR Laser to Goa at the end of March". Ntshepe, the "CEO of Denel was on board" and was overheard "saying to Kamal (Gupta) that they do not have to worry, Fireblade will never get international status".Irons pasted the WhatsApp message into the body of an e-mail he sent to Nicky and Jonathan Oppenheimer, remarking: "Now Kamal Gupta is a director of VR Laser and one of the sons who recently got married in Turkey ... I believe the time is opportune for us to terminate ties with the Gupta family and prevent them from using Fireblade."The Oppenheimers terminated their lease with the Guptas in June, forcing them to relocate their jets to Lanseria airport.Both pilots were approached to make sworn statements but declined, citing fears for their safety.In his affidavit Irons said the first pilot, who now lives in Dubai, "was initially willing to convey and confirm on oath what is recorded", which he confirmed in the presence of Werksmans attorney Darren Willans at a meeting in June. But he later backed out "because his family remain in SA and he fears for their safety".The Guptas, Gigaba, his department and Denel have all thrown cold water on the Oppenheimers claims.Gupta family lawyer Gert van der Merwe said the family was not aware of the allegations and would issue a formal response once they had studied the papers."These allegations will not go unchallenged as it has become custom to accuse the Gupta family of wrongdoing when one was unsuccessful in any venture."Home affairs spokesman Mayihlome Tshwete said the case was "a conflict between Denel as the landlord and Fireblade. Once the court resolves that we will go back to our engagement with Denel and Fireblade. Us declaring a port of entry now is putting the carriage before the horse," he said. Gigaba wasn t aware of any pressure brought to bear on Denel by the Guptas, Those who made the allegations "have the responsibility to prove it".Denel pointed out this was the second court application brought by Fireblade. The first application was dismissed with costs. "We view this second application as vexatious and frivolous; and will oppose it," Denel spokesman Vuyelwa Qinga said.However, Fireblade says it lost its first application on a technicality it was deemed premature because Denel had responded to its letter of demand within the timeframe stipulated in its lease.Qinga also denied that Mantsha or Ntshepe "have ever been pressured by anyone, including the Gupta family, to oppose Fireblade. All that s required is that Fireblade, as a tenant of Denel, must comply with national security legislation."Fireblade says it doesn t know what else this could possibly entail. In June the SSA issued its directors security clearance Despite this, Gigaba has apparently turned down the application again this month, reiterating Denel s security concerns and saying the project needs public participation."It s exactly like Optimum mine," said a source close to the process, referring to a finding by former public protector Thuli Madonsela that Eskom had driven the coal mine owned by Glencore into business rescue, with the only beneficiaries being the Guptas. Delays in obtaining Gigaba s approval have turned Fireblade s terminal "into a loss-making enterprise", he said. "The Oppenheimers will be forced to sell, and the Guptas will come out of the woodwork as buyers."What it means: Two powerful families are being drawn into a court battle about a luxury international terminal at OR Tambo airport.