Observation Lounge on Rovos Rail s Pride of Africa train. Picture: DAVID ALLARDICEIn an era in which speed is king, there are still those who long to travel at a far more leisurely pace, in super luxury. Rovos Rail founder Rohan Vos successfully positioned his Pride of Africa train in this niche sector, doing SA s tourism industry proud.He says Rovos is selling an experience, not a train journey.While the weekly return trip between Cape Town and Pretoria is the backbone of Rovos s operations, the venturesome rail group has spread its tentacles far further.It undertakes regular 14-day trips, starting in Cape Town and meandering along a 6,100km route to Dar es Salaam in Tanzania. Among other destinations in the Rovos line-up are Durban, Namibia and Victoria Falls in Zimbabwe. "We do not operate speed trains," says Vos.Riding Rovos s five-star, wood-panelled hotel on wheels does not come cheap. On the 51-hour Pretoria-Cape Town journey, the cheapest accommodation, a Pullman suite, will cost a couple sharing R17,495 each.Go even further upmarket and the most expensive accommodation, a Royal suite, comes at R35,150 each. Go all the way to Dar es Salaam and you are looking at US$21,550 each. But then the suite does take up half a carriage. It includes a full bathroom, bedroom and lounge.Vos says the US, UK, Germany and Scandinavia account for about 60% of guests, and Australia and New Zealand 20%.While Rovos s prices may appear steep, they are highly competitive in the world of luxury train travel."It is not easy making money out of a passenger train," says Vos.To just break even, Rovos must sustain average train occupancy levels at 50%; it is aiming to achieve an average 60% occupancy this year.Behind the glamour of the Pride of Africa there is a complex business keeping the wheels turning. "We employ 380 people," says Vos.The company has a lot to keep it busy. "We now have five train sets and a train especially built for functions," says Vos.The fifth of Rovos long-distance train sets was added in January when it acquired the privately owned Shongololo Express. Rebuilt by Rovos to a three-star standard, the new train has been put to work on slow-paced Southern African leisure routes. Shongololo Express is not a get-rich-quick venture and is expected to take three years to break even.Though Pride of Africa has earned a reputation as one of the world s foremost luxury trains , Vos says: "You have to bang the drum every day. You can t presume people know you."Keeping the train in the eye of travel agents and the public are 12 marketing specialists. "They are always on the road and we also have a full-time representative in Beijing," says Vos. "It is very costly."For Vos, who by 1985 had already built a thriving motor-spares business in Witbank, his move into the world of luxury trains was quite by chance. It began with a steam-train excursion to Magaliesburg."I became a train widow that day," says his wife Anthea, who has worked side by side with him ever since to make his vision come true.