Pravin Gordhan. Picture: THE TIMESBruce s List: A guide to informed reads.This isn t over by a long shot. National Prosecuting Authority head Shaun Abrahams may have made a fool of himself first charging finance minister Pravin Gordhan with fraud and then, yesterday, having to withdraw the charges, but he will not be asked to resign and he won t go voluntarily. Meanwhile the Hawks, President Jacob Zuma s private police force, will redouble their efforts to secure charges against Gordhan on the issue of the SA Revenue Service s so-called Rogue Unit , which Abrahams just a few weeks ago went on at length about at a press conference only to end with the news that the investigation wasn t complete and that they would charge him with the (now failed) fraud instead. The fact is that the Zupta conspiracy just has to get rid of Gordhan. National treasury is too important to the state capture project. Its signature is vital to just too many. We know from leaks from former public protector Thuli Madonsela s parting report on state capture that one of the prime points of discussion around the appointment last December of David Des van Rooyen as finance minister was a plan to draw smaller municipalities into the capital markets, using, probably, their assets as collateral. The prize for the syndicate driving state capture (the Gupta family and others, like Salim Essa) would be the huge fees and commissions payable to consultants (the syndicate) for sourcing the capital required. The fact is that Gordhan will still be a target for these people because, well, it s worth it.Meanwhile, I thought Stephen Grootes did a very good job this morning summing up the consequences of Abrahams stupidity. He reckons, though, that Gordhan is safe for now from the rogue unit line of attack. At least while Abrahams is at the NPA. I m not so sure. Another patsy can easily be found for that job. The driving force behind the hunt for Gordhan are the Hawks, and they will be as determined as ever to get the finance minister out: Analysis: Abrahams fumbles, Zuma blinks, but is Gordhan entirely off the hook?The Business Day front page lead of about a week ago, to the effect that the ANC had suppressed an internal report showing a wide spread of party branches want Zuma out, was an important milestone and helped explain why ANC chief whip Jackson Mthembu felt bold enough to warn his colleagues that they could lose the general election in 2019 if they do not change their ways (and their leadership). Grootes, again, is on a roll here as he looks at what the report means. It s an important discussion because while Zuma is determined to press ahead with the state capture project, he is also running out of time in which to complete it and his party is turning, clearly, against him. And as he is squeezed, we wait to see what comes out of the tube, so to speak: Discontent in the Ranks: Unease among ANC members creates glimmer of hope.My favourite new news source in SA, and I urge people who read this column to find these people and to start tracking them and perhaps to make a small regular donation to them, is an outfit called GroundUp. There s an authenticity about their reporting that I really like. They always seem to have a new way into familiar stories and often write well off the beaten track. If you want to know what is happening in the hidden parts of our country, GroundUp is the place to find out. This particular piece is both fascinating and fun. It is about a phenomenon in my part of the country, Transkei. Life in rural Transkei can be very boring but horse racing has taken off in a big way. I always wanted to write about it but never seemed to have the time. This is fascinating: GroundUp: Horse racing in the Eastern Cape The fastest growing sport in the country .In the US, the discovery of a huge new trove of e-mails that might embarrass Democratic presidential contender Hillary Clinton seems gradually to be turning in her favour. FBI director James Comey, who revealed that there is a new investigation going on into her use of private servers when she was secretary of state, is coming in for all kinds of flak. Basically, there is an unwritten rule in US politics that the law doesn t get involved in presidential elections this late in the day. The election is next week. It turns out Comey was always a strange appointment for Barack Obama to have made: So much for the upstanding James Comey: The FBI director s long career as preening partisan hack. And the really damaging thing is that he announced a new investigation without ever having read any of the e-mails he is investigating. Surely that smacks of a partisan intervention in favour of Donald Trump: The Dangerous Cowardice of James Comey.And you just have to read this. They often talk about the October Surprise in US presidential elections and when Comey revealed the new e-mail investigation it was assumed that was the surprise. But there might also be this: Internet experts have been studying traffic between Russian and US e-mail servers ever since talk began about two months ago that the Russians were meddling in the election in favour of Trump. What they found was incredible. A Trump server and a Russian bank server appeared to have been having, over a long period, some sort of conversation. What it may have been about no-one knows. But the pattern of communication is striking. This is long and complicated but if you want to know how professionals go about taking the Internet apart it is absolutely worth the read: Was a Trump server communicating with Russia?