Picture: MICHAEL ETTERSHANK Poor Michael Gove , I remember thinking back in June when he was mauled by the UK media for saying the British people had had enough of experts.Gove s comment was related to the various expert predictions on what would happen to Britain if citizens voted to leave the EU. Of course we now have the short-term answer to that but the longer-term picture is unclear. And at what stage can you actually say, "right, now we know"?My sympathy for Gove was not related to the EU issue. It was his scepticism about experts that resonated. I, too, may have had enough of experts (including "thoughtleaders").It may be because my working life has been in the economic/financial sector, which is awash with experts but where it seems nothing remotely like scientific laws prevails. Of course there s the underlying maths, which is quite scientific, but once you add in humans it all goes awry.My blood chills when I read a sentence in some finance or economic report that begins with "experts say" or "research shows".I m not beyond using either but increasingly I hear the echo.Often enough, remove the "experts say" or "research shows" and you will find an opinion survey. The most egregious example of this is the World Economic Forum s (WEF) annual competitiveness report. To its huge credit, the WEF does not attempt to hide the fact that this report is based on some statistical analysis and a lot of opinion. But before you know it we re all treating it as fact, helped along by all those nice-to-use lists.Just the other day I was reminded that the JSE is the best stock exchange in the world. It was said as proof that only good could come from the JSE.I have no idea if the JSE is the best stock exchange in the world or even what that means, but I doubt it deserves that honour.I m pretty sure even CEO Nicky Newton-King is doubtful. But getting the top slot in the WEF competitiveness report for a few more years may soon start to make her believe it.Digging deeperThe reality is, for those who bother to dig a little deeper into the WEF s report, the JSE s ranking has little to do with measurable facts and lots to do with the 44 SA business people who responded to the WEF survey.It is the opinion of these 44 people (from 50 in 2015) that is also largely responsible for SA scoring so badly on labour-related aspects of the Competitiveness Report. They are, after all, business people, who have probably learnt from reading all the earlier WEF reports that SA labour relations are appalling and workers are less productive than almost anywhere else in the world.Of the 138 countries featured in the report only four New Zealand, Norway, Gabon and Ireland have fewer respondents.Because of the WEF s reach, the opinion of these 44 South Africans has influenced global perceptions about SA and helped shape our reality. That doesn t seem scientific. Of course the experts may think otherwise.