Programmatic buyingProgrammatic media buying may be the latest digital advertising buzzword, but many media agencies have yet to explain to their clients why this tool works so well when used properly, not to mention what using it correctly entails.Programmatic media buying is increasingly gaining traction with SA media agencies because of its ability to hone target audiences, pivot and adapt, while increasing digital conversion dramatically. Reporting and campaign management make programmatic buying even more appealing, as does the fact that the technology and tools around the platform continue to advance, allowing users to collect important data, which can then be used to adjust and target online campaigns.As marketing budgets come under pressure, quality deliverables are highly sought after, as are platforms that provide more bang for the marketing buck. Programmatic media buying fits the bill here; provided agencies have the right tools set up and a dedicated campaign manager on clients accounts.Key to creating successful campaigns is the ability to react with agility to unexpected results or challenges. With programmatic buying marketers can delve deeply into the results and data from campaigns, allowing brands to adapt, improve and respond to customer needs or trends. It also allows for the campaign to be directed at the right audience that will enable the achievement of campaign objectives, saving both time and money using unique audience-building tools and network data.Programmatic buying necessitates a commitment and a slight appetite for risks, though the results are well worth it, if clients are working with the right agency. To this end, there are certain things that clients need to know. For starters, not all programmatic networks are created equal. Just because there is a lot of inventory doesn t mean it s good. Clients should ensure the agency s programmatic network has quality local and highly trafficked global ad exchanges.Agencies should also be applying the correct filters to ensure clients are getting quality traffic as opposed to merely high volumes. At the most basic level, doing geographic filters correctly is already a good start.Programmatic campaigns work best when there is a dedicated, knowledgeable resource optimising daily, if not throughout the day. No matter how good the software, it still requires someone to monitor whether clients are getting the best performance from their media. Constant insight and optimisation is required.All too often, agencies aren t upfront with clients with regard to the costs related to outsourcing. Clients should ascertain whether the agency has its own trading desk on the network or if it is working through a partner, to ensure they re aware of all costs involved.Having the right metrics in place is important; clicks are not the only metric that should be used to measure campaigns. In-depth reporting requires the setting up of clear goals and conversions, and results can be measured only by correctly tagging the campaign. In addition, full tagging integration across multiple platforms, from e-mailers to social media, is highly recommended for optimal campaign success and holistic insights. Only then will clients be able to see how people interact with their campaigns and whether conversions are taking place. Insights are more valuable than clicks alone.Crucially, remember that programmatic buying is not a quick win clients need to commit to the long term. It takes at least two to three weeks before the system can start optimising, and three months plus to build and grow remarketing lists. A good campaign run that delivers stellar results is possible only when programmatic campaigns are given time to mature and develop in correct timeframes. The big take-out: Programmatic buying has much in its favour; however, it takes long-term commitment from clients to ensure they re getting value from it. At the same time agencies need to be upfront with their clients in terms of how it all works.