Redefine's Galeria Echo shopping centre in Kielce, Poland. Picture: SUPPLIEDThree years ago Redefine Properties was still trading at a sizeable discount to other sector heavyweights such as Growthpoint Properties, Hyprop Investments and Resilient Reit.Redefine was lagging behind, both in terms of earnings and share-price growth. And the general perception was that many of the company s properties were of inferior quality.Redefine-owned shopping centres such as Golden Walk in Germiston and Sammy Marks Square in the Pretoria CBD couldn t quite compete in the prestige stakes with Brooklyn Mall in Pretoria or the V&amp;A Waterfront in Cape Town (Growthpoint owned).The number of government-tenanted office blocks in the Johannesburg and Pretoria CBDs that Redefine inherited from its merger with ApexHi in 2009 also raised lingering concerns about the quality of its income stream.But the restructuring exercise Redefine embarked on about two years ago has not gone unnoticed. It has been one of the sector s best performers in the year to date in terms of share price growth (21% up to November 4). Last week, the company also declared a solid set of results for the year to August, with 7.5% growth in dividend payouts. That placed Redefine on a forward dividend yield of 8.6% compared with Growthpoint s 7.9% a significant improvement from two to three years ago, when the yield gap between the two was typically 1.5 percentage points.The firm s transformation, led by CEO Andrew K nig and chairman Marc Wainer, has not only resulted in the disposal of smaller, poorer-performing properties (including its government-tenanted portfolio), and replacing them with bigger, better-quality ones, but also a bold move into new sectors and offshore territories.For instance, Redefine was the first among the larger-cap property stocks to broaden its focus from the usual mix of offices, retail and industrial buildings to the burgeoning student housing market via a tie-up with unlisted developer Respublica. At last week s results presentation, K nig said Redefine intended to grow the number of student beds in its portfolio from 3,500 to 10,000 by end-2017.Redefine also continues to grow its offshore footprint, recently diversifying its hard-currency income streams from the UK, Germany and Australia to Eastern Europe. Earlier this year Redefine managed to pip fellow SA bidders to the post for a R4bn stake in a 1.2bn portfolio of properties from Polish-based Echo Polska Properties (EPP). The latter, which owns 18 shopping centres and office blocks across Poland, was listed on the JSE in September.K nig is keen to expand Redefine s exposure to Poland, which he believes is undershopped. He says EPP could easily grow assets from the current R15bn to R30bn-R40bn in three years."Poland still holds significant income and capital growth uplift potential through new developments, extensions and redevelopments," he says. "We also like the fact Poland s real estate market is more liquid than other countries in the CEE [Central and Eastern Europe] region."Another large acquisition announced recently is that of JSE-listed development play Pivotal, which will add R11bn of properties to Redefine s portfolio. A successful takeover of Pivotal (likely to be concluded in January) will swell total assets to about R84bn and take Redefine s market cap to more than R64bn (on current share prices) not that far off Growthpoint s R72bn.Meago Asset Managers director Jay Padayatchi says there is no doubt that Redefine has improved the quality of its assets and earnings, locally and offshore, in "leaps and bounds" over the past two years. He says the EPP and Pivotal transactions are game-changers. "The EPP acquisition has given Redefine access to good assets in the high-growth CEE region, while a successful acquisition of Pivotal will result in the significant enhancement of asset quality."Padayatchi says Redefine needs to do some more cleaning up of its portfolio before it will be rated alongside Growthpoint. "But it s a lot closer than what many may think."Old Mutual Investment Group portfolio manager Evan Robins agrees that the quality of Redefine s SA portfolio has improved markedly. He says the company is likely to continue to outperform if it successfully implements all the deals currently on the go. "However, as funds get bigger as Redefine has it gets harder for individual initiatives to make a material difference and larger deals are necessary."