Picture: ISTOCKExchange-traded funds (ETFs) are one of the most popular ways of gaining exposure to listed companies. They are also listed on stock exchanges such as South Africa s JSE.The key to ETFs is that they are passive funds. In other words, the asset manager selects an index such as the S&amp;P South Africa Top 50 (an index calculated by S&amp;P Dow Jones Indices that comprises the top 50 largest shares listed on the JSE) and buys the shares in that index into the ETF in accordance with the index. Indices are all rules-based, which means the construction of the portfolio is transparent and investors know at all times what is in their ETF. This helps align the expectations of investors and the ETF provider. The ETF is then listed on the exchange and investors can buy or sell it like a share.While the ETF will be rebalanced periodically to ensure it remains aligned to the index it tracks, it is not an actively managed fund and there is no team of stock pickers evaluating companies to include in the fund.The cost of operating the ETF is therefore much lower than for an actively managed fund and, as many investors in South Africa are realising, the cost of investing affects the returns. Therefore, an effective investment vehicle with lower associated costs will tend to deliver better returns, especially when that differential is compounded over many years.Gareth Stobie, MD of CoreShares, says ETFs are a success story adopted by retail and institutional investors around the world.While ETFs are a relative newcomer to South Africa, they are gaining momentum globally with assets under management now well more than $3-trillion. Seen as pro-consumer , ETFs have been described as the democratisation of the fund management industry, as they are used by institutional and retail investors alike on the same commercial terms. The initial reason to choose ETFs and hold them as a significant portion of a portfolio is often the attraction of paying significantly lower fees, says Stobie. However, some of the other dynamics can be even more interesting. ETFs offer excellent diversification. Someone who opens up their stock-broking account for the first time often has limited resources and can only afford to buy a few select shares, leaving them exposed to the performance of one or two companies. Concentration risk of this sort is not ideal. He says the stock market can intimidate the average investor. It is highly unlikely for that investor to get broad diversification and pick stocks that will outperform the market or an index. Professional fund managers struggle to outperform the market, so the chances of the average retail investor doing so are pretty slim. South Africa is similar to other global markets when it comes to investors and professional fund managers trying to outperform the index. The most recent SPIVA report (S&amp;P indices versus active managers) to the end of June 2016 shows 86% of South African equity fund managers underperformed the S&amp;P South Africa Domestic Shareholder Weighted index over a five-year period.Index or passive investing was first pioneered by celebrated investor and thought leader John Bogle, the founder and now retired CEO of the Vanguard Group described by Time magazine in 2004 as one of the world's 100 most powerful and influential people .Bogle created the world s first index mutual fund back in 1975. It aimed to track the S&amp;P 500 index over time and keep costs down.One of Bogle s central investment lessons is to be an investor rather than a speculator . Stobie concurs and makes a clear distinction between investors and traders or speculators.Traders, he says, are people who opt for short-term exposure to a share in the hope it will spike and give them a fast return.Investors, on the other hand, are in the market for the longer term. They acquire investments they believe will continue to deliver sustained value over many years. For investors, index investments make sense as they hold a well-diversified representation of the market without carrying significant costs.CoreShares recently launched the iconic S&amp;P 500 index in ETF form for the first time in South Africa.South Africans can buy this famous investment strategy right here in rands on the JSE.This article was paid for by CoreShares.