A file photo of Stuttafords in Hyde Park. Picture: RUSSELL ROBERTSRetail dinosaurs. There are a few: Garlicks, John Orr s, Greatermans ... and that s just in SA. This week I wrote a piece in our sister publication, Business Day, about how Stuttafords, the last bastion of department store retailing in SA, could be on its way to retail heaven.The privately owned group is in business rescue. No matter how management wants to spin it (no job cuts, zero store closures, business as usual are you kidding me?), business rescue proceedings have varying levels of success, and always render a company inextricably changed.We re all adults here, we know what restructuring means. It s first cousins with those other "R" words, re-engineering and right-sizing. Business rescue is essentially a clemency card, a legal pause button because by the time a company opts for it, it is likely to have pissed a few people off (read: creditors, suppliers and landlords). Its aim is noble enough to make sure a business continues on a solvent, liquid basis but the success rate, locally and globally, just isn t great.Deloitte recently put out a restructuring study that showed that the sectors most at risk of being distressed in the next 12 months are resources, agriculture, construction and then retail, with 2016 forecast to be a milestone year for the restructuring industry due to market forces including political uncertainty and corruption, global economic health and commodity prices.How did Stuttafords get here? It failed to stay relevant and adapt to changing retail landscapes. It s as easy and as complicated as that. When, in 2006, the group was bought by a consortium led by Bruce Rubenstein s Vestacor with Retail Ventures and the Ellerine brothers, there were already some debt and cash-flow problems.There were high hopes of restoring it to its former glory. Stuttafords had a legacy of pandering to ladies who lunched and big dealmakers who would frequent its tea-rooms. It had a food hall and a haberdashery counter. Apparently, the thing to do in 1963 was to have "tea and koek" on the balcony of Stuttafords in Adderley Street, Cape Town. The new owners would go on to funnel untold millions into the business, re-introducing old-fashioned services like tailors and corsetieres.That didn t work because shoppers had already begun the shift towards global brands. Stuttafords owners (well, Rubenstein at least) saw this and the brand had another costly makeover to become the "Selfridges of SA".It morphed into a "world of brands". At least three well-placed sources say this was a major bone of contention for retail stalwart Eric Ellerine and so began the rift between the shareholders. It s tricky to say how profitable Stuttafords chains really are or ever were. When I met the CEO at the Hyatt in Rosebank at the weekend he claimed that all stores, "outside the anomalies associated with unnecessary promotion" were profitable. That Stuttafords is in business rescue surely raises some eyebrows, then?I wouldn t say the move towards branded merchandise was an overall stuff-up. Stuttafords can hardly be blamed for the ravages of a devaluing currency, the economic slowdown or competition.What it should have seen, though, was the shift towards value. I recently chatted to Reuben Beelders, portfolio manager at Gryphon Asset Management, and he says that over the past few years, shoppers have demanded "value" and fast-fashion: that is, cheaper goods that are worn for shorter and shorter periods of time.