Daniel IsaacsIf someone came to you tomorrow with R100m to invest in just one company, which would it be?Assuming this client has no prerequisites, such as a minimum income from investment or limited investment time horizon, I think a great mix of income, security and growth potential comes from AB InBev after the SABMiller deal. Though AB InBev was the largest global brewer before the deal, this now combines the number one and number two brewers into a true mega-brewer. In case you think this title will breed laziness and complacency, this has not been the case for the lean operators of AB InBev prior to the deal. I think there are significant cost savings to be gained, as well as operating synergies. The stock will also be on a dividend yield of about 3%, with growth coming from improving in some current geographies, new geographies and continued premiumisation of the portfolio.What was your first job?The usual a waiter. My first job when I finished studying was in London, working as a data analyst for a quants hedge fund.What s your biggest regret?Not investing more time in certain relationships when I was younger.What was your worst investment mistake?Buying something just because it looked very cheap. It proceeded to get a lot "cheaper".On what occasion do you lie?"Have I put on any weight, honey?"What s the best investment you ve ever made?There is nothing better than the compounding effect of a decent business with good management over time. The power of compounding management s decisions is hard to appreciate upfront. That s why Albert Einstein called compound interest the most powerful force in the universe. He was talking about interest, but the compounding principle is the same. All my best investments fall into this category. The difference between a company that compounds earnings at 10% versus 20% over 10 years is 160% versus 520% return.If you found a lottery ticket tomorrow that had won US$100m, what would you do?I d like to think I d try find the owner and hope for a big finder s fee.What s your favourite song?It s too tough to single out one favourite ... Songs I never get tired of would include "Hotel California", "Stairway to Heaven", "Where is the Love?" and "Bohemian Rhapsody".Your greatest extravagance?Investing in "me" time. There are always people to meet and things to do. You need to make an effort to put aside time for yourself and use this to introspect, recalibrate or just veg out, especially if you re an introvert.Name a place you ve been to that lived up to the hype.Croatia. Moving from island to island along the coast, you get to see and experience the quaint towns, azure waters and spectacular views.If you could fix one thing in SA today, what would it be?The two main issues SA currently has are jobs and education, with education being a main contributor to the jobs issue. Though the jobs issue is more pressing in the near term, for a solid medium- to long-term future we need education sorted out as soon as possible.Which talent would you most like to have?To be able to play a musical instrument. I feel as though there is a whole section of my brain I m missing out on.