Picture: ISTOCKIn the same week that SA s unemployment rate topped 27%, an expert panel proposed that the country introduce a minimum wage of R3,440/month. Panel chairman Prof Imraan Valodia says he is "confident" that, at this level, the negative impact of job losses will not exceed the positive gains for low-paid workers.Only, it s an impossible claim to make, given that the panel makes no explicit economic or welfare findings. The panel s problem was that, from the outset, it faced two irreconcilable bodies of research from Wits and UCT.Wits claimed that a minimum wage starting at R3,500/month could reduce working poverty and inequality. It said there would be few job losses because higher wages would boost consumption and output, while firms would adjust by raising their productivity and prices.On the other hand, UCT warned of significant "disemployment". A wage of R3,400 could cause more than half a million job losses, it cautioned.The panel tried to embrace both approaches, accepting the economic rationale that underpinned them as equally valid. It then took in lessons from other countries such as cases where a minimum wage reduced poverty and inequality, or where the negative impacts were less severe than those predicted upfront.The magic number of R3,440/month was chosen partly because it works out to R20/hour, which just has such a nice ring to it, apparently."The power is in the round number," says Valodia. It can be easily communicated, captures public imagination, and "significantly changes the balance of power in the bargaining relationship".However, the panel admits that affordability is an issue. As it stands, a wage of R3,500/month exceeds the pay of 6.2m workers or 47.3% of the workforce including nearly 60% of clothing and furniture workers, 54.6% of construction workers and 48.2% of retail workers.Mindful of SA s "economic fragility", the panel has proposed generous "transitional arrangements". So employers will have until July 2019 to make the shift, while micro businesses get an additional year. And domestic workers and farm workers will, at least initially, have to be paid only 75% and 90% of the minimum wage, respectively.There will be no increase to the R20/hour until an independent statutory body, the Decent Work Commission, has been established to manage the new system and has studied the fall-out.But these arrangements are likely to take longer than three years. During that time, expect inflation to erode the real value of the minimum wage anyway. This is where there is room to fudge the process, since it is conceivable that as evidence of job losses emerge, government could stretch out the "transition" to spare the economy.But for now, politicians have gushed that this wage will make a real contribution to reducing working poverty and inequality. Labour, on the other hand, will claim it is neither a living nor a decent wage.Business will probably quietly begin preparing to ameliorate higher wagesThe most likely scenario is increased mechanisation, job cuts and higher consumer prices, while informal trading will become a more commonplace feature.What is certain is that the minimum wage is not going to encourage job creation, stimulate new firms or lower the cost of doing business.And for the unemployed or unskilled person, this is an unmitigated disaster.The panel hopes that the benefit of a minimum wage will outweigh the costs. But if they re wrong, the economy will pay the price and the most vulnerable in society will be cruelly affected. It s a dangerous populist gamble that could well blow up in all our faces.