Picture: GALLO IMAGES/AFPThe optimism that greeted Nigeria s decision to float its currency in June has given way to frustration, as the naira is yet to settle at a fair value almost six months since the policy shift from a fixed to floating exchange-rate system.The currency has been trading at a rate of N315/ US$ in the interbank market, but the rate in the parallel market, where most Nigerians buy and sell foreign exchange, has been much lower, at about N460/$ .Experts believe the official rate does not reflect the true value of the currency, as the Central Bank of Nigeria is reportedly interfering with market operations by advising operators on how much to bid.Meanwhile Nigeria s domestic intelligence agency, the department for state services (DSS), arrested some parallel market operators this month and reportedly instructed them at what rates to trade. A spokesman for the Bank welcomed the action, and claimed that those arrested were unlicensed operators involved in speculation.With the arrests unleashing further uncertainty on the market, the authorities appear to be oblivious to the damage being done to the economy. As an import-dependent economy, the supply of foreign exchange is crucial to sustaining activities in virtually all sectors of the economy. The inevitable hoarding that is likely to follow the DSS s actions will make it more difficult for Nigerians to access foreign exchange.The question is: why has the Central Bank refused to allow the naira to float freely? The short answer is political interference.Since he assumed office, President Muhammadu Buhari has let it be known that he opposes the devaluation of the naira. On a number of occasions before the Bank s policy shift, he said he was not going to "kill" the naira. After being somewhat convinced that a float was necessary, and having reluctantly given the go-ahead for the policy to be implemented, he stated at a forum with business leaders that he failed to appreciate the economic explanation behind the policy.Observers are convinced that by manipulating the market to forestall a further decline of the naira, the Central Bank is carrying out the wishes of the president.This has raised concerns about whether the Bank is able to act independently to fulfil its mandate of achieving monetary stability. Stakeholders are of the opinion that the Bank, under governor Godwin Emefiele, is weak and incapable of acting independently.Lagos-based banker Ope Simpson notes that recent policy reversals by the Bank have fuelled this view. "They are not able to stand firm on their positions. When the new foreign exchange policy was launched, they chose five banks as primary [foreign exchange] dealers and then went back and made all the banks primary dealers," he says."In another development, they allowed people to pay using cheques into savings accounts, then turned around and said it was illegal. When there are these mixed signals, it shows that either the Bank is making wrong initial decisions, or has come to realise that these decisions are wrong, or that there is interference from somewhere."The independence of the Bank has been a regular topic of debate. Immediate past governor Sanusi Lamido Sanusi fought attempts by the legislature to place the bank under its regulatory purview. But he was hastily removed from his post by former president Goodluck Jonathan for embarrassing revelations about unremitted funds.Given the prevailing situation, these questions are being asked again as stakeholders seek a decisive solution. The consensus on the way forward is that the current half-hearted approach must be abandoned in favour of a full market-based approach. If the objective is to allow market forces to set the prices, attempts to interfere will undermine the process.A distinction must be made between professional intervention and interference. Whereas the latter has sometimes beennecessary to smooth out bumps, the former is damaging and fuels instability as has been experienced over the past months. The Bank has to decide what its overall strategy is soon.More delays may be too costly.