ChangeClickbaits. Nobody falls for them anymore. Nobody falls for much anymore, unless it has appeared on the Internet practically that same morning. With so much information around, ideas fall in and out of favour in what seems like seconds. Even the idea of information overload itself has become redundant. We thought that we created technology, but in a strange twist of fate, it seems more accurate to say that technology is creating us affecting how we think, act and communicate. It s a classic sci-fi story: the machine becomes more powerful than its creator and takes control. It s like Hal, the robot in 2001: A Space Odyssey, but infinitely bigger and more powerful. Ironically, it all seems to have materialised when Apple introduced the Macintosh with a 60-second Orwellian epic during the 1984 NFL Super Bowl. I showed a young woman running through rows of indistinguishable, drab people and flinging a hammer at a big screen image of Big Brother. As the screen exploded, it symbolically marked the beginning of the change to a new era or at least our perception of it. In the ad business, technology transformed our business, and since then the waves of changing technology have kept rushing in, again and again, assimilating advertisers directly with consumers.Those of us in advertising feel as if we re living in the most exciting time the industry has ever had to offer. Advertising has never been more exciting, more immediate, more thrilling, more consequential. We re not only working more creatively, but the technology we use to create is also hard at work creating us.We live in an age when everyone is always in touch, and everyone is capable of creating content of the highest standards. With more and more power and attention in the hands of the real culture makers of the world, we could conclude that this is what the end of advertising looks like at least advertising as we understand it; how could you possibly define something that may be completely different this time next year?From the ashes of advertising, a new creature has risen. We don t know what to call it yet, but we do know that it s fulfilling its role by simply communicating to the willing, telling stories, informing and allowing interaction to flow.Advertising has become more interactive and collaborative. Ideas can work, after all, only if they mean something to someone, somewhere. Ads have to grab attention, maintain their hold and be completely relevant to an audience eager to share that sensation with others. An awe-inspiring brand exponentially replicates, and the more attention it gets, the more people will interact and pay for it.Listening to culture and generating ideas that people care about is the best way to drive interest and attention. Like the time we found out that people would love to have milk in glass bottles again, rather than plastic ones, and started giving them exactly that. They loved it. They wanted more. Glass was back in a big way, and so was our client, Consol.We heard that people want to end illegal dog fighting. So we did an awareness campaign for the SPCA that got PR value of over R5m for zero media spend in a matter of hours. More importantly, over 40 dogs were rescued as a result of the campaign. It all came about after a single afternoon, through understanding that it can make a positive change to the world we live in when people are informed and empowered and when they realise that what they do truly makes a difference.The big take-out: Successful agencies need to become like their work constantly changing, ever evolving, never ending, because change has become the only constant.