Richemont and Remgro chairman Johann Rupert speaks at the 2016 Sunday Times Top 100 Companies Awards where he received the Sunday Times Lifetime Achievement Award.Celebrating and inspiring personal progress has always been at the heart of the Johnnie Walker brand. It s on the basis of this premise that we sought to collaborate with a like-minded property to honour the top-performing JSE-listed companies at the sixth annual Sunday Times Top 100 Companies Awards.Since its inception in 2010, the event has become an indomitable feature on the business calendar. It has awarded a range of people and companies, from public servants who demonstrated an unwavering commitment to progress in their country to chief executives who made remarkable contributions within their industries.Outstanding organisations and business leaders were once again celebrated at this year s awards ceremony, which took place on November 8 at the Sandton Convention Centre in Johannesburg.Richemont and Remgro chairman Johann Rupert received the much-coveted Sunday Times Lifetime Achievement Award. Rupert s career has been driven by passion and an unparalleled allegiance to South Africa, having founded the Small Business Development Corporation (SBDC), which has helped fund several small and medium-sized start-up companies and created more than 600,000 jobs. Once you have more than you thought you d ever get, in terms of material wealth, you realise that there are more important things. I tell my kids that before you do good, it helps to have done well. Having done well, I have the freedom to share. My achievement is the pleasure that my wife and I get from doing just that, said Rupert.A second notable winner in the business sector was Calgro M3, the property development company. It was named the 2016 Sunday Times Top Company for its contribution to the eradication of informal settlements through integrated property development aimed at entry-level consumers. Calgro M3 was recognised as a market leader in the integrated development segment of the residential market and the development of memorial parks.The public sector was also in the spotlight. Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan won the prestigious Business Leader of the Year Award as voted by revered business leaders and commentators alike.With a long history in politics, Gordhan has been an activist for three decades, helping to build a democratic society that can change people s lives. Accepting his award, he said the accolade was a huge acknowledgment by the business community that we are all in this together, and that collectively we have the will to make our country a better place .He joins a list of prominent business leaders honoured in this way, including Johan van Zyl, Michael Jordaan, Phuthuma Nhleko, Brian Joffe, Graham Mackay, Maria Ramos, Adrian Gore, Whitey Basson and Christo Wiese.Global African icon and Johnnie Walker ambassador Lira, who performed on the evening, described the occasion as an exceptional blend of people making great strides in keeping South Africa prosperous and moving it forward. As captains of the Top 100 companies, they served as inspiration for and real examples to South Africa s future leaders. Johnnie Walker has long been a progressive and iconic global brand a remarkable story of success and leadership founded on simple values: hard work, honesty, inspiring progress and a relentless pursuit of excellence. To these outstanding South Africans we say, Keep Walking.This article was paid for by Johnnie Walker.