Picture: JEAN-CLAUDE COUTAUSSE/BLOOMBERGA few weeks after acknowledging that the Zambian economy had hit rock bottom, its government delayed the presentation of the budget for 2017 by a month to this week to give it time to "exhaust consultation with stakeholders".Zambia s constitution says a new budget must be tabled within 90 days of the inauguration of a new president . President Edgar Lungu was sworn in on September 13, and his government points out that it is still within the law.But the delay, and late salary payments for civil servants, stalled infrastructure projects and efforts to secure an International Monetary Fund (IMF) loan confirms long-held views that government is not financially sound, says Neo Simutanyi, executive director at Zambia s Centre for Policy Dialogue."It looks as if government is facing a financial hole caused by an unsustainable public debt and budget deficit," he says. And government should tread carefully. "We know the IMF loan comes with stringent conditions that hurt the poorest members of society," says Simutanyi.He says Zambians should be concerned about the conditions that will accompany the IMF package. Government has talked about making "tough decisions" since the start of the negotiations for an IMF loan.The country s Energy Regulation Board has already increased the price of petrol to 13.70 kwacha/l from K9.87/l. The prices of diesel and paraffin have also shot up. It s "in line with the policy decision of 2014, to remove fuel subsidies, and migrate to cost-reflective pricing of energy services and products," the board says.As a result, the cost of transport for short distances has risen by 20%-25% in some towns of the Copperbelt Province and Lusaka. Long-distance costs rose by at least 10%. This is also expected to affect food prices. The Millers Association of Zambia has warned people to expect the price of maize meal to rise in coming months.More cuts are planned. Finance minister Felix Mutati says government is spending over US$1bn/year to maintain fuel, electricity and agricultural input subsidies. This "inhibits infrastructure development and shelves other capital projects and development ambitions". He says the removal of subsidies is part of government s new economic recovery and stabilisation policy, to be rolled out over the next five budgets. Government says the cost of producing, distributing and selling electricity should attract a minimum price of US10c/kW from consumers. The subsidised rate now is US3c-6c.In 2015, government raised electricity tariffs by around 200% to attract investment into the energy sector. But a public outcry forced it to reverse the decision. A pending general election, which the ruling party was keen to win, contributed to the reversal.As government negotiates the IMF loan, whose conditions will be reflected in the upcoming budget, it must adhere to a constitutional provision that loans be approved by the national assembly, Simutanyi says, "I would like to see government respect the letter and spirit of the constitution [in relation to] the IMF loan and ensure the public is aware of why the loan is important, what it is meant to achieve and how it will alleviate poverty. With more than $7bn in foreign debt, there is a need to be sure we re not contracting loans that will [worsen] poverty and benefit a few."National assembly approval is aimed at ensuring benefits for the people and avoiding excessive borrowing that could burden future generations.