Anton Pillay. Picture: HETTY ZANTMANOver the past year there were flows of R145bn into just the SA unit trust sector, quite apart from life and segregated inflows.Nevertheless, Coronation Fund Managers had net outflows of R79bn in the 12 months to September 30, of which R18bn was from unit trusts. Life offices such as Old Mutual, with tied sales forces, are putting pressure on sales staff to support house brands.Coronation s outflows came after a mediocre performance in 2015. As late as April 2016, Coronation ranked ninth out of 11 balanced managers in the Alexander Forbes Large Manager Watch. But by September it had moved back to second.Coronation CEO Anton Pillay says the trend of net withdrawals from pension funds (62% of assets under management) continues, though they were lower in the second half. More money leaves the sector from resignations and retirements than comes in. Gross outflows have increased, from 4.5% eight years ago to 8% in 2016.And Coronation has not taken new money for its balanced or equity retirement portfolios since 2012, while all its competitors are open for business. Allan Gray, which had been closed from 2009 to 2013, is also accepting new business. Funds are closed because investment performance can suffer when funds get too big.Coronation remains highly profitable, with after-tax profit of R1.57bn, an operating margin of 39%. It demonstrates the scalability of the business, which would have the same staff complement of about 250 whether it manages R100bn or (as it does) R599bn.But perhaps asset managers should not be listed, as all that analysts notice is that revenue was down 9% to R4bn, and profit after tax down 13%. The industry trend towards lower fees hit Coronation, with the net fee margin down from 0.79% to 0.6%. Some of its performance fees have been revised downwards under client pressure.Coronation has kept a lid on total costs by adopting a variable cost model, with noncore activities such as administration outsourced to partners such as Maitland. Its operating costs actually fell by 3% as its variable costs fell, even though fixed costs were up 22%.