Picture: PHILLIP NOTHNAGELBruce s List: A guide to informed reads.There s just nothing left in the tank. Jacob Zuma s administration is dead in the water. There is no leadership, no vision. There are no policies, no clue. We are left with gesture politics (leaving the ICC), party infighting (Gordhan), sleaze (China, rhino horn, a massage parlour and the minister of intelligence) and incompetence (Shaun Abrahams). The ruling ANC is so distracted by its coming leadership battle that it cannot hold, among its members, even the most basic conversation about why it did so badly in the August local elections. It cannot see the wood for the trees. If ever there was a party with a lesson to learn from Brexit or the Donald Trump victory in the US last week, it is the ANC. In its rush to become the establishment, of leaders to enrich themselves and to inflate their power, it has become a caricature of the governing parties of those powerful Western industrial democracies now threatened by the rise of populism. Trump won because the US establishment had turned its back on the common man. The ANC is doing the same here. It will pay the ultimate price, if not in 2019 then in 2024. And as Zuma drowns in legal disputes going back more than a decade, the people positioning themselves to replace him are not much better. They may not be corrupt but they promise struggling citizens nothing but more pain and more neglect. The ANC is incorrigible (the word, spelt the same in Spanish, means beyond correction ). And if you think 2016 has been bad, wait for 2017. The ANC will be spectacular ahead of its elective conference in Kimberley at the end of next year. I loved this piece from Stephen Grootes today, not because it says anything new but because it is such an authentic cry of despair. Is this, he asks, the best we can do? By God in heaven, he cries, saying nothing, doing nothing, is no way to run a country. And Carol Paton at Business Day writes the column I was hoping to do first. In the moral and intellectual swamp that Zuma has made of our political economy, perfectly upright, smart and capable citizens lose their way and drown. It s a terrific piece that looks at how three people who might have been among our best have been sucked into the mud, dirtied and spat out by Zuptaland. For crying out loud.Just to cheer you up, a short news story on the resignations of the two remaining members of the SABC board. The only guy still left is the chairman. That won t stop the communications minister sticking her head out of the swamp to claim the board with one member is still quorate and capable of making decisions (as she did a few weeks ago when there were just three) but that s how we roll here. Forget the fact, or reality. Just make stuff up. Zuma will find a way to reward her.Meanwhile back to the US, where the Far Right is preparing to drain the swamp (of the establishment) in the wake of the Trump victory. This is easily the best analysis for president-elect Trump s foreign policy options as his inauguration on January 20 approaches. And one of my favourite American intellectuals, former Clinton labour secretary Robert Reich, has some hard things to say about the Democratic Party and what it has to change to survive the Trump years. It s a long list.