Director-general Lungisa Fuzile, finance minister Pravin Gordhan and deputy minister Mcebisi Jonas en route to parliament for the medium-term budget policy statement. Picture: GCISThe negative market reaction that followed the finance minister s medium-term update turned to euphoria earlier this week as the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) dropped all the charges against him.The rand gained 30c on the assumption that Gordhan s position as SA s incorruptible finance minister is now secure.The positive market reaction also reflects optimism that SA society has risen up across political and ideological lines in support of clean government and won, striking a hard blow against state capture and corruption.With Gordhan as a proxy for fiscal rectitude, the fear was that without him holding the purse strings, SA s fiscal framework would unravel. But though the fiscal future is infinitely more secure with Gordhan at the helm, SA is not out of the woods. Five years of low growth have pushed SA up against its fiscal limits and unless there is a recovery in economic growth, more pain is on the way.This was the sobering message of Gordhan s medium-term budget policy statement last week. The message becomes somewhat darker in treasury s fiscal risk assessment, contained in an annexure at the back of the document. It flags three main risks to the fiscus: further economic growth disappointments; a higher than expected public sector wage bill; and the "parlous" finances of some state-owned enterprises (SOEs).SA s fiscal straits can be traced back to the stimulus it unleashed during the global financial crisis, since it contributed to a near doubling of the gross debt-to-GDP ratio to about 50% in the years since 2008. Since then, spending restraint and tax increases have almost halved the 2009/2010 fiscal deficit of 6.3% to just over 3% of GDP, as it is now, but the debt ratio has continued to rise, mainly because of serial growth disappointments.Treasury s growth forecasts have had to be revised down every year since 2011. Last week, Gordhan reduced them again. It s now expecting growth of 0.5% this year, rising to 1.3% in 2017 and 2 % in 2018, compared with 0.9%, 1.7% and 2.4% previously.However, treasury concedes there is a "moderate probability" medium-term growth could be far lower than this and that it could even fail to rise above 2% in the long term. The resultant revenue shortfall would blow treasury s debt projections out of the water.This risk is captured by Scenario A on the graph on page 26. In it the implementation of economic reform is slow, policy uncertainty continues, global growth stays weak and commodity prices don t recover. This erodes domestic confidence, investment and growth. It aptly describes conditions over the past year, bar the recent commodity-prices uptick.Scenario A includes the assumption that SA loses its investment-grade credit rating and the economy enters a recession, contracting by 2% next year. In this event, treasury s modelling predicts SA s net loan debt to rise from 45% of GDP now to almost 60% in five years, and keep climbing.In the equally plausible Scenario B, the economy recovers slowly, reaching real GDP growth of 1.9% only in 2019. Global turbulence returns as concerns about the effect of Brexit and China s transition are realised, hurting the rand and fuelling inflation. Net loan debt rises to 50% by 2020 but stabilises as growth eventually rebounds to 3%.In the more upbeat Scenario C, GDP growth rebounds to 1.6% next year and stabilises at 2.5% in the outer years thanks to an export-led recovery based on rand weakness. Global demand and commodity prices stage a firm recovery. Net loan debt stabilises at 47% in 2018/2019, a year ahead of treasury s target, and then falls back to below 45% by 2021.All three scenarios illustrate how essential it is that SA reignite economic growth.Treasury s long-term modelling suggests public spending is sustainable only if growth returns to its historic average of 3%. "However, if growth remains stuck below 2% over the long term, a stable debt path will be difficult to sustain at current levels of expenditure, even if no new policy initiatives are taken," treasury warns.In short, SA has reached its fiscal limits and, as long as growth fails to recover, the country cannot afford existing levels of expenditure let alone new policies. The medium-term update pulls no punches, stating bluntly that SA s "long-term policy aspirations far exceed available resources".Low growth is not the only significant fiscal risk SA faces.Treasury has coined the phrase "policy and budget execution risks" to capture the fact that political choices, such as a university fee freeze or generous wage settlements, could place unforeseen pressure on SA s spending limits. It says if these pressures materialise, it would most likely maintain the expenditure ceiling, though this would mean shifting resources away from other priorities, potentially eroding service provision. For instance, higher salaries for teachers could mean fewer learning materials for children.Treasury believes the outlook for SA s contingent liabilities is also "a source of vulnerability". The major concern is government s guarantees to SOEs, which stood at R470bn in February. Of this, R263bn has been realised. The largest guarantee exposure, of more than R170bn, supports Eskom s capital investment programme. Any deterioration in Eskom s financial position whether through undertaking a huge nuclear build programme or otherwise would increase the risk to the fiscus.The IMF estimated in July that a contingent liability shock, in which 75% of government s guarantee exposure was realised, would push state debt above 70% of GDP by 2021."While extreme, this exercise serves to underscore the growing risks posed by contingent liabilities from SOEs, both to the fiscal outlook directly and indirectly through its potential impact on investor confidence," the IMF noted.Treasury is all too aware that all these fiscal risks are interdependent. For instance, it notes that an economic contraction could weaken an SOE s balance sheet, triggering a call on a government guarantee at the same time that tax revenue is declining.In July, the IMF warned in a detailed debt sustainability analysis that if some of these risks materialised, SA s debt ratio could hit 65%-75% of GDP within the next five years. According to IMF studies, 70% is the "high-risk threshold" often associated with debt distress in other countries.The IMF concluded that SA would have to institute further measures to ensure fiscal sustainability. However, if the near-term goal was to prevent debt from rising above 51%, SA would have to tighten too much and too fast, it warned. This could be self-defeating.The best solution would be to spread tax hikes and expenditure cuts over several years to limit the damage to growth. Better still, SA should focus on structural reforms to raise the growth rate, it advised.Gordhan took this advice on board last week. Gross debt will be allowed to peak at 53% in 2018/2019 but additional tax hikes of R13bn and targeted expenditure cuts of R26bn will still be needed over the next two years on top of February s hefty amounts.At the same time Gordhan stressed that everything possible must be done to rebuild confidence to bolster fixed investment on which growth depends. But the medium-term budget policy statement offered scant sign that government is making progress implementing growth-enhancing reforms.The statement failed Nomura strategist Peter Attard Montalto s key test question: whether there was any reason to revise up SA s long-run potential growth from its current 2%-2.5% level. The answer, he feels, is no. If anything, higher taxes could suppress growth while significant risks hang over the fiscal outlook. On this reading, SA faces a strong likelihood of being downgraded to junk status in December.But on Monday, SA s axis shifted when the NPA backed down on the charges against Gordhan. To the extent that Gordhan s reprieve is a victory for stakeholder co-operation and has infused South Africans with a sense of common purpose, the future is unlikely to be as bleak as treasury s more dire fiscal scenarios.There is every hope that confidence, so necessary to stoking a recovery, might now return to the SA economy.