Picture: THINKSTOCKI have never heard selling cars described as a profession or selling groceries being called one. Yet people who sell life insurance or unit trusts insist that their field is a profession.And they don t liken themselves to one of the quasi-professionals in financial services such as accountants and actuaries. Rather, they compare themselves with a much older profession: that of the medical doctor.I am not sure why being involved in sales should be considered inferior or even shameful; it is a very necessary part of a functioning economy. And the reality is that it is hard to imagine that doctors, or even accountants, are being threatened by the opening of a new digital sales channel.The argument against robo advisers reminds me of the argument about whether to keep the trading floor of the JSE open. At the time it was said that, unlike other countries, SA needed to preserve the personal touch, and that nobody would want to trade on the screen. That seems ridiculous 20 years after the JSE floor finally closed.I am sure that in 20 years time most life and unit trust product sales will be Web based, with no human intervention.I was interested to see a contrary view from Andrew Cross, an adviser at accounting firm BDO.He argues that it is misguided for the Google generation to think they can do everything for themselves.Advisers take time to build a relationship (though the days of discussing finance round the kitchen table are over; these professionals expect you to visit their high-priced offices) and the client and adviser should eventually build up trust.Cross says that online investing is not equipped to provide detailed, in-depth financial planning: it will not be able to show how investments fit into each person s individual circumstances.If you fit the very narrow demographic served by advisers, that is. Financial planning is probably the least transformed business in SA, and is still overwhelmingly white.Also, in my experience it isn t interested in you unless you have substantial net assets, and it certainly isn t interested in helping you get out of debt.Holistic financial adviceWhere Cross has a point is that advisers can help provide more control over finance.They can prevent emotionally driven short-term money decisions. But there are fiduciaries who can play this role, such as lawyers and managers of trusts. They won t be earning their money from the financial products you buy but from their time.I will consider that financial advisers have taken a big step towards being a profession when they charge a time-based fee. I would not consider an industry that subsists on renewal commission by another name to be a profession.That is not to say there aren t good businesses out there.NFB, run by Mike Estment, was one of the pioneers of the concept of financial planner as trusted adviser, using the model of the family solicitor.Warren Ingram of Galileo Capital is a bubbling cauldron of ideas though I am not sure when he has gaps in his busy television and radio career to see clients.These are certainly advisers who are suitably qualified to give holistic financial advice. However, as Cross says, it is important to click with a planner remember that, unlike actuaries, advisers have personalities.Cross says you should be prepared to work interactively with your financial adviser. Under the current fee, you pay him 0.5% of your assets, whether you talk to him or not.