It was going to take an extraordinary feat of mamparadom to emerge as the 2016 mampara of the year. Applications for this position came in thick and fast from benighted, beleaguered and be-buggered persons all year long. Penny Sparrow set the tone for a year of idiocy with her racist remarks about black people on what were once her dear little whites-only beaches. While she remains the unsurpassable spiritual winner of this award, she was soon overwhelmed by others who should have known better. Hlaudi Motsoeneng’s declaration that he was a messiah sent from the heavens to bring magic to broadcasting was extraordinary. By December, he was still in the mamparadom running, as parliament heard testimony about how he constructed an empire of self-promotion and dodgy dealings. Brian Molefe cried himself out of a job after the extent of Eskom’s dealings with the Guptas were laid bare by the previous public protector. Drinks all round at the Saxonwold shebeen for a supreme effort to win this prize. But it failed against a true titan of mamparadom. The winner of this year’s award is none other than Shaun Abrahams, the national director of public prosecutions. He laid the groundwork for this achievement in April when the high court ruled that the decision to set aside charges of corruption against President Jacob Zuma had been "irrational". He immediately applied to the constitutional court to appeal against the decision. Being a man of unwavering principle, he made it clear he was challenging the decision because it raised questions about the ability of the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) to make its decisions independently. The appeal had absolutely nothing to do with the fact that he had been elevated to his high position by the man he would now have to charge — Zuma. The constitutional court told him to go away, as he could not appeal. At least Abrahams had made the point that one should act with care, circumspection, hesitation and rationality before prosecuting someone. But then an odd thing occurred. Acting without care, circumspection, hesitation or rationality, Abrahams stunned the nation and the world by announcing that he would summons finance minister Pravin Gordhan to appear in court on charges related to the early retirement of Ivan Pillay, his deputy when he was at Sars. All the facts had been considered and he had no choice but to go ahead with the charges, Abrahams said in a strange, robotic staccato which made some of those near him check his back to see if there was a winding mechanism. The announcement amounted to the single largest seismic event on SA’s 2016 political calendar. The rand, already punch-drunk from the David Des van Rooyen left-hook in December 2015, hit the canvas once more. It was a dead certainty that SA would be downgraded by ratings agencies if the farcical court case went ahead. It was then reported that, on the day before the Monday announcement of the charges, Abrahams had made a pilgrimage to the ANC’s Luthuli House, where he had met behind closed doors with Zuma and other luminaries. Abrahams was hurt by the suggestion that the charges against Gordhan had been discussed at the meeting. It had been about lawlessness at universities and other lesser matters, he pointed out. He was wearing one hat on Sunday (cap-in-hand) and another on Monday (clown’s hat). The entire nation immediately believed him and made their support for his honesty known on Twitter. As political shenanigans worthy of mamparadom went, the charging of Gordhan ranked very high. Not only was it damaging, ill-informed and idiotic, but it spawned a political counter-movement which rendered Abrahams politically weaker. At this point, as you stitched your US dollars into your mattress and Googled "Canada immigration", you probably thought Abrahams had this prestigious annual award sewn up. But there was one more gigantic act of mamparadom to come. Without batting an eyelid, Abrahams called another press conference at which he denounced his own decision to charge Gordhan, saying: "They did not have the requisite intention to act unlawfully. I have decided to overrule the decision to prosecute Mr Magashule, Mr Pillay and Mr Gordhan. I direct the summonses to be withdrawn with immediate effect." It was a virtuoso performance. He even managed to convey an air of disappointment at the sloppiness of the Hawks investigators. For the hullabaloo on the markets over the charges against Gordhan, Abrahams had this one-liner: "Does the economy depend on one man?" Did he owe the nation an apology? "I certainly do not owe anybody an apology. I certainly do not." Abrahams said his decision to reverse charges, so to speak, was "what I call transparency". There you have it. The 2016 mampara of the year is awarded, gold class, to the greatest of them all: Shaun Abrahams.