It’s not complicated: a salary is the reward for employees who satisfactorily perform their duties; a bonus is the reward for performance that exceeds those standards. Yet this simple truth seems to have escaped both the management and board of the state-owned oil company PetroSA. It is also, seemingly, a bridge too far for Tina Joemat-Pettersson, the minister of energy to whom the board reports. In the past three financial years, PetroSA’s bumbling executives have managed to cobble together a truly terrifying R16.7bn in financial losses, from revenues of R54.7bn. Last year, 2015, PetroSA reported the single biggest loss in its history: a mammoth R14.6bn. This year, PetroSA managed to pare this back to a net loss of R449m. So what did these esteemed leaders do? They immediately rewarded themselves with bonuses totalling R17.3m, as the Sunday Times reported this past weekend. This happened even after the board of directors initially said the executives didn’t deserve a cent in bonuses, but changed their minds after getting a "legal opinion". There is, of course, an important context for this. PetroSA has for years invested billions drilling for gas deep in the Indian Ocean so it could replenish dwindling resources at its Mossel Bay gas-to-liquids refinery. Dubbed Project Ikhwezi, it found only a tenth of the gas its feasibility studies said was there. As a result, it had to write off R11.7bn it spent on the project. (It’s not surprising to learn that a manager who had been suspended for 14 months as a result of this debacle has also been paid a bonus.) Brushing off this disaster, PetroSA vainly committed further billions to building another refinery up the coast, outside Port Elizabeth, dubbed Project Mthombo. Feasibility studies started in 2009 and, had it succeeded, Mthombo would have produced 300,000 barrels of vehicle fuel a day. In the end, however, the project was silently shut down last year. Moving swiftly on, PetroSA then spent a considerable part of three years and millions in cash trying to buy 80% of Engen, which was held by Malaysian state oil company Petronas. Now, it’s true that exploring and drilling for fuel deep underground, including in the seabed, is an expensive, risky business. On that score, you can’t blame the PetroSA geologists for finding less than half the gas they thought they’d find. But there’s no justification for PetroSA’s board reckoning that the same executives who presided over almost R5bn in irregular expenditure in the past few years are worthy of any bonus. After all, this is money spent in contravention of the company’s own policies and the appropriate legislation, according to PetroSA’s annual reports. The board’s bizarre U-turn is mystifying. The legal advice they were given said that "affordability would not qualify as a justifiable reason" not to pay bonuses. From the outside, it seems like poor advice, given that those executives failed to meet the overwhelming majority of pre-agreed performance targets. And to make it worse, the luxury of bonuses was not extended to other employees, who furiously (and correctly) called the bonuses a "self-enrichment scheme". To add insult to injury, those bonuses are being paid while PetroSA is slashing jobs to save costs. PetroSA says it paid the bonuses as part of a "talent retention scheme". Given the dire performance of the executives, what’s there to retain? Surely PetroSA would be better off without them. As the political head with the ultimate accountability for PetroSA, Joemat-Pettersson should insist that the bonus money is returned immediately. Anything less is an insult.