A new DA in 2019? This is the proposition party leader Mmusi Maimane has put forward as the party settles in to govern the three metros it snatched from the ANC in this year’s local government election. After the election, the DA has shifted from a party with its only real power base in the Western Cape to one with a footprint in Gauteng, the Eastern Cape and Limpopo. Maimane is going about effecting changes that he hopes will result in the DA expanding this footprint in the 2019 national election. A policy review, shifting its headquarters, and a change in the way the DA selects its leaders is on the cards as the party eyes winning another province and possibly bringing the ANC below 50% in 2019. In an interview with the Financial Mail, Maimane says the party is not "deviating" from its liberal stance but will be anchored more in values than in ideology. "Nobody goes to the ballot box to express an ideological choice ... What I am saying is yes, we are a liberal house, no question about that, but when you get to the door [this time] perhaps you might be greeted with ‘We value fairness, we value freedom, we value opportunity ... ’," he says. A battle over its ideological orientation has long been simmering in the DA and came to the fore when the DA voted in favour of the Employment Equity Amendment Act in 2013 under former DA parliamentary leader Lindiwe Mazibuko. "I think it’s an organisation which is growing and has its own problems, but I think the DA that we have today and the DA we will have in 2019 will be different organisations," says Maimane. He recently tabled an extensive plan for the party between now and 2019. The DA’s electoral performance in this year’s local government elections improved marginally to 26.9% support, from 23.94% in 2014. The ANC dropped by eight percentage points. Opposition parties, including the DA, have hinged their election campaigns on the failures of the ANC, especially under the leadership of President Jacob Zuma. Increasingly there are moves inside the ANC to remove Zuma as head of state, as witnessed in the national executive committee meeting last week. But what does a Zuma-less ANC mean for the DA? "It is an anxiety," Maimane says. Every time youface a new opponent you have to learn their new tactics but, he says, the problem is not just Zuma himself, but the ANC as a whole. "I know everyone writes and says the decline of the ANC was a function of Zuma. Yes, there is some merit to the issue, but I often wonder, in a world where liberation movements are going to decline anyway ... you can’t remain over 60%, 70% in perpetuity." With its new strategy, the DA is hoping to finally bring the ANC’s electoral support below the 50% mark. Maimane says his party needs to do more work on the ground, with DA members encouraged to be "activists". The DA changed its campaign style for the local government election. Because of this the party made contact with more than 7m people, Maimane says. "I have had to focus the organisation on it, so that everybody knows they are an activist." Another part of Maimane’s plan is to diversify the DA, but this does not mean subscribing to a quota system. "It’s a crucial project that we have to achieve, for the simple reason that I believe that the DA, if it’s going to become an alternative for SA, must represent all South Africans." Maimane is also busy with a DA policy review, particularly around the economy, health, education, housing and land reform. Next year it will table its "country recovery plan", which articulates critical policy intervention that would focus on what the DA would do when it arrived in government. But much can shift in politics over the next two years. Maimane’s own future in government is being contemplated and he appears open to the prospect of standing as a premier candidate in Gauteng, but still believes his task as the party’s leader in parliament is critical. Either way, the test for the DA heading into 2019 is whether it can more meaningfully capitalise on the decline of the ANC than it did in 2016 and compel ANC voters abandoning their party to place their mark in the DA’s box.