Poor Atul Gupta. He’s the ingratiating one of the three Gupta brothers. The good cop. He was the guy who had to do all the apologising to the nation after the Guptas had, with President Jacob Zuma’s covert approval, landed a party of wedding guests at an SA Air Force base, Waterkloof, near Pretoria in 2013. On Sunday, the Sunday Times published its annual "rich list" which this year showed that Atul is the richest black man in SA. It is the last thing he needs right now, what with him and his family accused of looting the state, with Zuma’s active assistance. To make it worse, it is almost certainly not true. The Rich List merely calculates the value of shares that individuals own on the JSE and the listed Gupta company, Oakbay, is probably worth only a fraction of its official market capitalisation. It is barely traded and the share price is artificially maintained. The brothers — Ajay, Atul and Rajesh "Tony" Gupta – may have their reasons for holding the Oakbay price at around R20, but it isn’t clear (nothing about them is clear). But it could not possibly have been part of the plan to win the Sunday Times’s front-page-lead space at the weekend. The Guptas are in enough trouble already. That is why the Financial Mail has selected them as winners in the politics category of its Newsmakers of the Year for 2016. It couldn’t happen to a nicer bunch of people. Basically, the Gupta story is well known. Atul arrived in SA at the dawn of our democracy. The myth is that he started small and, with his family, built up a business empire. The reality is that the Guptas very quickly spotted the ease with which ANC leaders, newly in power but always short of cash, could be flattered and manipulated. And it was former president Thabo Mbeki’s friend and gatekeeper, Essop Pahad, who first drew them into close contact with the ANC leadership. The Guptas were later to buy Pahad a house and started a monthly magazine for him to edit for his trouble. They were quick to spot Zuma as a business asset and, to be fair to them, they backed him after Mbeki fired him as deputy president in 2005. They put their aircraft and their pilots at Zuma’s disposal so he could get around the country easily and discreetly. They would have played a big part in the Zuma campaign to wrest the leadership of the ANC from Mbeki in Polokwane in 2007. They put their arms around Zuma and have never really let go. They employed two of his children and one of his wives. They started a national newspaper explicitly to support the ANC and Zuma and then did the same again with a TV channel. On one now-infamous state visit Zuma paid to India, the Guptas literally ran the show, ushering Zuma away from official functions to meet Gupta associates and potential business partners. They own Jacob Zuma to this day and it is a significant political achievement. Obviously it must be costing them money but we don’t know how much or how it is paid. However, as Zuma and the Guptas are put under pressure, details of their business and political web have begun to emerge. They have used their political leverage in two ways. One is direct — they make acquisitions using funds made available to them by state-owned institutions. Both the Industrial Development Corp and Eskom have advanced the Guptas money to buy mining assets. The second method is more subtle. Directly through their ownership of Zuma, they are able to influence — in fact, to dictate — the composition of the boards of directors of major state firms. Eskom is one. Transnet, Denel and Broadband Infraco are others. What happens is that the ministers of public enterprises are instructed, either directly by the Guptas or by Zuma, to make certain appointments, and they have done this. Most often, their nominees are involved in the board subcommittees of procurement. This way they are either able to sell laptop computers to, say, Eskom, and, as investigative journalists have recently revealed, are also able to "secure" contracts for certain suppliers to, in one case, Transnet, for a handsome commission which is dressed up and laundered through the Gupta companies before making its way out of SA. It is a disgrace but the good news is that the Gupta/Zuma years are coming to an end. It is impossible to say how much money the family has made in SA and impossible to know what they have done with it. A new R400m home in Dubai is one clue. But a net is closing around them that they will not easily escape, even if they now spend a lot of time outside SA. Money laundering is under pressure from the world’s major governments and any ill-gotten gains here will be found and frozen. In addition, they have seriously damaged Zuma, their prize possession, by crassly trying to make cabinet appointments themselves. Some, like mineral resources minister Mosebenzi Zwane and co-operative governance & traditional affairs minister David Des van Rooyen, have agreed, but others, like deputy finance minister Mcebisi Jonas, have blown the whistle on them. The Guptas are impervious to public scorn but Zuma isn’t. He will have to take responsibility for what he has done, but it is clear the Guptas have tricked him into trusting them. Zuma genuinely thinks they are legitimate businessmen. Part of the net is straight compliance. The big SA banks have closed Gupta accounts and instead of taking them to court, the Guptas are trying to get Zuma to do their dirty work for them. So Zuma is threatening a public inquiry. Unless the "inquiry" is to be somehow fixed in advance, the Guptas and their associates could not withstand any genuine examination of their years in SA. National treasury, the object of serious Gupta attention, has released a list of reportable Gupta transactions worth more than R6bn. They may all be legitimate and the fact that they were reported does not make them illegal, but the last thing the Zuptas want is any more digging. The former public protector, Thuli Madonsela, in her final weeks in office turned in a report on this state capture by the Guptas. Focusing on the way Zuma had, at the Guptas’ behest, marshalled his minerals minister to harass the owner of a big Eskom-linked coal mine off the property so the Guptas (in partnership with Zuma’s son) could buy it, and then the way Eskom bent over backwards to ensure the Guptas could raise the funds to secure a change of control in the final hours, Madonsela claimed the scalp of Eskom CEO Brian Molefe. She reported a long chain of phone calls between Molefe and Ajay Gupta. The Eskom board is anyway packed with Gupta proxies but the depth of the Molefe link was shocking. Molefe resigned soon after the report was published. As Zuma enters his final year as ANC president, the true source of his political clout, the Zupta chain of command and the web of influence and graft it supports, will quickly fray: 2017 will be about who succeeds him at the December party elective conference in Kimberley. There are only three candidates with a real chance: Zuma’s choice, Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma (his ex-wife); deputy president Cyril Ramaphosa; and ANC treasurer-general Zweli Mkhize. None has anything to offer the Guptas. There may have to be deals struck with local rent-seekers but any association with the Guptas would be fatal. So the Guptas will be gone soon, to Dubai. Of course, if the opposition wrestle the ANC down to below 50% of the national vote in 2019, things could change dramatically. The Guptas might even be back but that would be because a new SA government had successfully extradited them and would be putting them on trial.