After a year-long fight, acting judge Hendrik Jacobs has dismissed former deputy pension funds registrar Rosemary Hunter’s request for an independent investigation into her former employer’s controversial funds cancellations project. In judgment handed down on Wednesday in the high court in Pretoria, Jacobs dismissed Hunter’s application to amend her initial application — which sought access to two crucial reports into the cancellations project of the Financial Services Board (FSB) — to replace it with an application for a fresh, court-supervised independent investigation. He also threw out the new application. Hunter was ordered to bear the legal costs of the five respondents she took to court, incurred from August 2016, the day after her term expired. The respondents included the FSB, FSB chairman Abel Sithole, CEO Dube Tshidi, former deputy pension funds registrar Jurgen Boyd and the minister of finance. Hunter said she felt obliged to take the matter further due to the number of people deprived of their pension savings as a result of the cancellations project. "This may be in the form of an appeal, or it may take other forms," she said after the ruling. Hunter was expecting to lose. Jacobs’ ruling followed a three-day hearing, which concluded on December 1, and the swiftness in which he made his decision in the "complex matter" concerned her. "The fact that he came back so quickly makes me worry," she told the Financial Mail the day before judgment was handed down. "It might be that he took his own time [studying all the documents before the hearing]; he only took over as acting judge on October 14. I’m trying to be strong." FSB spokesman Tembisa Marele said the regulator was studying Jacobs' judgment and would comment thereafter. Hunter, whose contract with the FSB expired in July, took her then-employer to court in January. She sought to obtain access to two reports investigating the manner in which the registrations of more than 4,600 pension funds — which were "orphaned" as they did not have a board of trustees, or were shell funds because they lacked assets and liabilities — were cancelled. She had initially raised the alarm with the FSB, saying it appeared the cancellations were conducted outside the powers of the registrar of pension funds. The board of the regulator commissioned retired judge Kate O’Regan to investigate the matter, but O’Regan asked for a forensic audit to complete her report. KPMG was duly appointed to conduct the audit. Hunter requested access to O’Regan’s report, but claims the FSB offered it to her on the provision that she sign a confidentiality agreement. The FSB also did not give her a copy of the KPMG report. This prompted her litigation. When the FSB made the two reports public in June, it also said there was an ongoing investigation by independent pension funds lawyer Jonathan Mort. That investigation had at that point found no actual prejudice in 46% of the funds KPMG found to have been cancelled with potential financial prejudice to beneficiaries of R2.5bn. When the hearing kicked off, Mort had delivered the second of three reports to the parties involved in the litigation.