The big day has arrived and we have switched over to our brand-new Financial Mail website. We are sure you will enjoy the experience. If you are viewing this site on your mobile or on a tablet you will notice that – unlike the old FM site – it automatically adjusts to your screen size, making it easy to scroll to the stories you want to read. This is one of the many innovations introduced by our developers who have worked extremely hard to create a modern, clean and easy-to-navigate website. The good news is that all of your favourite features are here. Use the menu to help you find what you are looking for. And, if you register for free, you can have your say in the article comments section that we introduced due to popular demand. But there's much, much more for you to read and enjoy. The Financial Mail site is part of a family of high-powered business and politics titles that comprise the BusinessLIVE family. When you click on the BusinessLIVE logo (to the left of the Financial Mail masthead) you’ll get to see the best of FM along with content from our other business titles.New Financial Mail app We will also launch a new version of our mobile app this month. If you have the current Financial Mail application installed and it doesn’t update automatically by mid-month, you can update it manually via Apple’s App Store or the Google Play store. A gift to our readers We will publish a free, digital-only edition of the Financial Mail magazine on December 15 that will feature FM’s Newsmaker of the Year. The expanded issue will include other in-depth features including a deep-dive into why the tourism sector hasn’t capitalised on a weaker rand; the future of Murray & Roberts and the construction sector; and 40 years of television in SA. We’ll also have a strong investment section, with the best and worst small-cap stocks to buy, and a look at healthcare investments in SA – sizing up Netcare, Life Healthcare and Mediclinic. Writers include award-winners Claire Bisseker, Marc Hasenfuss, Toby Shapshak, Ray Hartley, Peter Bruce and Sikonathi Mantshantsha. This edition will be available on the new version of our app, as an e-edition, as well as on the new FM website.More about BusinessLIVE BusinessLIVE is the ultimate home for South Africa’s discerning business readers, publishing stories from Business Day, the Financial Mail, the Sunday Times’s Business Times, and Investors Monthly in one place along with video from our multimedia team and Business Day TV. It is updated throughout the day by the expert journalists in our business newsroom and by our fast news team. BL Premium The BL Premium section, which will be for subscribers only from early 2017, will include the top columnists from our business publications as well as full digital access to The Wall Street Journal, a selection of daily top articles from the Financial Times, and all of Morningstar’s incredible share and unit trust data. Here’s the good news: register now on BusinessLIVE to try out BL Premium for free! Any questions? Email feedback@fm.co.za and we’ll do our best to answer.