What’s the most interesting thing about you that people don’t know? I’m very forgiving and loving (and quite a romantic). Who is your favourite hero of fiction? It absolutely has to be Iron Man — my techno-geek hero. He has class and style, is tech savvy and loves fast cars — every single one of my passions. What do you consider the most overrated virtue? Sympathy — in a negative sense. What was your first job? I was a packer at Makro (on the merchandising shelves). I could not afford tertiary education, and bursaries were only for second-year students. Which phrase or word do you most overuse? Love. What is your biggest indulgence? Nuts! What’s your one top tip for doing a deal? Transparency and collaboration. In a deal, both parties have an objective to achieve, and being open and honest helps. What is your biggest regret? None — I see mistakes as lessons learnt, and avoid repeating them. Where were you when Nelson Mandela was released from prison? I was at home watching it live on television. He was released in February 1990, and I was still feeling euphoric after finishing my matric in 1989. What’s the worst airport you’ve been in? Atlanta, in the US. I was once delayed there for 12 hours. Is there such a thing as "enough money" and, if so, how much is it? No — money does not define you. Period. Nominate your eighth wonder of the world. Fitness. What can be a better wonder than the self? We are all remarkable creations with a purpose. Respecting oneself and taking care of oneself rank high in my books. Tell us about a hidden gem in SA that not many people know about. Casablanca restaurant in Morningside, Durban. If you are ever in that city you have to try its Indo-Portuguese cuisine. What is the one investment you wish you had made, or made earlier? Switching to a Mac — I wish I had done that years ago. The user experience and simplicity of Mac products are cutting edge. I guess being the MD of DionWired and not having made the switch years ago is not cool! What are you reading at the moment? And what’s the one book everyone should read before they die? I enjoy reading multiple books at the same time. Right now I’m reading Brad Stone’s The Everything Store, a book about the Amazon story, and Patrick Dixon’s The Future of (Almost) Everything. Everyone should read Stephen Covey’s The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People and any one of Alfred Adler’s books to understand people and behaviour. When and where are or were you happiest? When both my children were born.