Picture: XANDERLEIGH DOOKEYBruce s List: A daily guide to informed reads.Easily the best read of the day is Tom Eaton in The Times, powerfully reminding us that we need to call things what they really are. SA s leaders are in fact thieves and are stealing public money. They do this through state-owned companies, which Eaton correctly identifies as ATMs. Because we don t call things what they are we never get to fix them. Well, most of us. There s still outgoing public protector Thuli Madonsela out there trying to wrestle answers about state capture and the Guptas from President Jacob Zuma in her last few days in office. What a spectacle that story has become. Naturally, he doesn t want to answer her and his tactics are Nkandla all over again. Zuma should coach the Springboks he d fit right it. If by some misfortune you find yourself with the ball in your hands, kick it as far downfield as you can, boys ... Sadly, as we know, giving the ball back to the other guys too often usually means you lose the game. That is where Zuma is heading. It s only Tuesday. Madonsela has until Friday 5pm.Meanwhile, our best universities are in agony as the academic year slips away. The violence yesterday in Braamfontein was shocking and, of course, Zuma was nowhere to be seen. That might be a blessing but someone has to lead this country. Let s start with Ranjeni Munusamy making the point that while Zuma s schedule might be too full to allow him to pay attention to his universities, it isn t too full to prevent him sparring with the public protector to save his own skin: Move over students, Khwezi: Zuma needs to question Madonsela s witnesses. And here s the Eaton piece. We really are in a lot of trouble: Let's start calling things by their right names - Hitler fanatic, not student leader.Over at the Daily Maverick, there are some events in our public life that wouldn t really be important if Richard Poplak didn t cover them. Yesterday in Braamfontein was different. It was a big moment. And he wrote it well. And fast: TRAINSPOTTER: #FeesMustBrawl the Battle of Braamfontein.But what do we do? I have a really high regard for the way ANC veteran Raymond Suttner thinks and writes. There s not a specific answer in this piece but there s a clear message. People have to stand up and be counted. We cannot be run by thieves: Op-Ed: South Africa in crisis how do we get out of it?