Picture: THE TIMESExtract Group, the mining services specialist that remains behind after enX acquires Eqstra s profitable industrial equipment and logistics operations, probably won t get enthusiastically shovelled into deep-value portfolios yet.Eqstra s share price implies that Extract is worth about 25c in the market s mind compared with a hard net asset value of more than 120c/share. The cynical market valuation is perhaps understandable. The commodity cycle is at a delicate juncture and work for the mining services company is not exactly in abundance. At best Extract s prospects, to the casual observer, might be viewed as binary.Aside from the commodity cycle, Extract despite some slick rearrangement of what was almost R3.2bn in external debt remains highly geared, with some tough legacy contracts to see out. The critical difference now, of course, is that the gearing is friendlier in that enX injects R1.4bn into Extract via a R101m placement of shares (giving enX 20% of Extract) as well as a subordinated loan of R700m and a R600m preference share issue. enX then also assumes R90m of Extract s senior debt, which becomes part of the subordinated loan.Obviously it s more comfortable having a 20% strategic shareholder holding the loans than nervous banks breathing down the necks of Extract executives. The bottom line is that external debt reduces to R620m.What will be a key factor in debt reduction efforts is that Extract still has R735m in assets held for sale comprising mainly contract mining assets worth R636m. If suitable prices can be fetched for these assets, then Extract will be free of its pesky external debt.Meanwhile, investors will be looking for signs that Extract, which focuses mainly on the junior mining sector, can secure viable business.Current mining contracts include Platmin s Pilanesberg platinum mine, Anglo American Platinum s Mogalakwena mine and junior platinum producer Tharisa Minerals, as well as Delta Mining s Nsele coal project, Sephaku s Aganang limestone project, and Karowe diamond mine in Botswana.Extract CEO Justin Colling says the company is challenging everything it does, from operating systems to contract structures. Efforts to bolster profitability and diversify the revenue base will include targeting one new contract a year, with a leaning towards more offshore and hard-currency exposure."We are looking at asset-lite solutions that are easily exportable. We don t want to be chasing work at any cost," says Colling.Commodity diversification will include seeking new contracts in the gold, bauxite and coal sectors. At this point Extract is generating 86% of its revenue in SA, with two customers in the platinum sector accounting for a chunky 55% of its top line.Colling sees things panning out markedly differently in the medium term. The three-year target is to generate only 60% of revenue in SA, with African and global contracts accounting for 20% each. Importantly, the customer spread is set to alter for the better too. In the past financial year just two clients accounted for 55% of revenue, but Colling sees this changing to about 40% in three years.The commodity spread is also more reassuring. Within three years Colling hopes to rebalance the 62% exposure to platinum and chrome to 40%, with gold and diamonds making up 20% each, and coal and other commodities accounting for 10% each.Longer-term growth plans include acquisitions to build a more diversified mining services provider though other companies would probably prefer to see definite signs of profitable traction before edging closer to Extract.Colling stresses no turnaround companies will be considered for acquisitions; only cash-flow-generative and earnings-accretive opportunities will be mulled.Ultimately, it s still going to be a grind for Extract in the short to medium term. But the share might well generate a strong longer-term upside if investors dig in at the right time.