Picture: ISTOCKBruce s List: A guide to informed reads.Jan Smuts apparently used to say that SA was a country in which neither the best nor the worst ever happened. He might have said that a hundred years ago but the fact is it still applies, even though some really good and some really bad stuff still happens. Why for instance, would the head of the National Prosecuting Authority, Shaun Abrahams, attend a meeting with the president a day before charging finance minister Pravin Gordhan with fraud, inside the ANC s party headquarters in Johannesburg? Has he no judgment at all? No-one in their right mind thinks Abrahams comes even close to being the nonpartisan official the constitution enjoins him to be but it is still shocking when stuff like this happens. And then the lies about what was discussed. It was the student protests, he says, but then why was the minister of higher education not at the meeting? Or the minister of police? Obviously, they are both useless at their jobs and would not have had anything useful to say but surely, when breaking the rules, some modicum of effort should have been made to make the student meeting look vaguely authentic?And then, blow me down if a good guy inside the ANC, chief whip Jackson Mthembu, doesn t stand up and say the entire national executive of the ANC should resign in the wake of the August 3 local election results a disaster for the ANC and because the party is simply doing nothing to restore its place in society. Fix the drift. Fix the corruption. Mthembu is simply saying what must be on the minds of most ANC supporters. If the party doesn t fix itself then voters will do it for them in the general elections in 2019, Mthembu fears, and deprive it of its majority in the National Assembly. It is a brave thing to do but it would not have happened if he didn t think the time was right. He sees, as do many others, a marked weakening of President Jacob Zuma s position ahead of the party congress in December next year which will elect a new leader. Zuma wants to control his succession he must, in order to prevent himself being charged with hundreds of counts of fraud and wants his former wife, Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, to replace him. They have children together and what mother would send her children s father to jail? But I doubt he ll succeed. Ranjeni Munusamy is good in Daily Maverick today on just how bad things are looking for Zuma, even though he tries hard to hide it: ANC Blowback: Mthembu breaks conspiracy of silence, while Zuma-Abrahams meeting raises alarm. And Natasha Marrian and Genevieve Quintal pick up the same disturbance in the force as Mthembu goes for broke. Will he ignite the fightback that takes Zuma down? Shades of Polokwane in Jackson Mthembu s call.And I have often asked myself, but never really written it, what happens to all the sad and fairly useless little men and women Zuma has surrounded himself with as he has made his miserable progress through two terms in office. Stephen Grootes has a creditable go here: Zuma s True Expendables.I have, on the other hand, tried my hand a few times at the question Max du Preez asks in his latest column. Is SA ripe for revolution? My answer has always been that I doubt it. We are a fundamentally conservative lot in SA. Consider that the Economic Freedom Fighters, despite all the obvious opportunity, managed to win fewer than 100,000 more votes in the local elections than they did in the 2014 general election: Is SA headed for revolution? Still in SA, I really enjoyed Anton Eberhard s thinking on Eskom s mad rush to procure a new nuclear fleet of power stations. As he says, such a decision would be irrational and vulnerable to a lengthy legal challenge: Expect legal challenge if Eskom sticks with its irrational procurement course.At least we re not the only nation with stupid politicians. The British are having a rough time of it following their vote in June to leave the European Union. The pound has collapsed and inflation is on the rise. Worse, the British seem to live in an industrial twilight zone where they are still a manufacturing powerhouse. In a way they are but these days it is mainly foreigners who do their manufacturing. Jaguar? Foreign-owned. Land Rover? Foreign-owned. I can t remember when I last bought a British-made object for Christmas. And the foreigners who make things in Britain went there because of the easy access they had to the wider EU market. That is now going to be cut off and it won t be long before they relocate. Britain s strongest industry , banking, is on the cusp right now, according to the Observer: Brexit: leading banks set to pull out of UK early next year. And their real industrialists are beginning to sweat too. It s the price of hubris. We want our country back, they cried. Well they have it now but what are they going to do with it. We South Africans already know that a weak currency doesn t mean manufacturing exporters spring up from nowhere and deliver you to some sort of Teutonic exporting nirvana. The fact is there s very little left to manufacture that isn t already being manufactured and the Brits have always been bad at turning innovation to profit: Manufacturers feel falling pound is bad despite increasing their exports.