When the tug Osprey slid into Durban harbour s murky waters last month it marked a milestone for SA s shipbuilding industry. Built by Southern African Shipyards (SAS), she is the fourth in a series of nine hi-tech tugs made for the Transnet National Ports Authority (TNPA), as part of a US$100m contract."It is the biggest single order ever awarded to an African shipyard," says Prasheen Maharaj, CEO of SAS.SAS has been praised by a competitor for its achievement. "The tugs Voith Schneider propulsion system makes them complex to build," says Mike Hawes, a marine engineering consultant at oil rig and ship-repair specialist DCD Marine.SAS is not new to the challenge. It has delivered 12 similar tugs to TNPA. "We are now one of the world s biggest builders of Voith Schneider-equipped tugs," says Maharaj.But he is aware of the limits of the local industry. "The niche in which SA shipyards can compete is for vessels under 100m long," he says. "Above that and you start running into competition from yards in China."It is a niche that Cape Town-based Nautic Africa, another big shipbuilding player, is also sticking to. "We can go up to 85m vessels but tend to stay in the 60m range," says Nautic CEO James Fisher. Nautic s key focus is on patrol vessels used extensively by oil companies to secure their West African oil fields. The oil price slump makes it a tough market."We have had a terrible year but there are signs of a positive trend emerging," says Fisher. "We have secured a contract to supply 24 [27m-long] ferries for use on Abidjan s waterways. It is worth $25m."SAS has adopted an "if you can t beat em, join em" approach to Chinese competition. It has an agreementwith a division of China State Shipbuilding (CSS), the world s biggest building group."The Chinese can bring to SA skills and knowledge it would take us decades to build," says Maharaj. The Chinese can also bring the big capital needed to undertake the development TNPA plans for the Port of Saldanha s industrial development zone.TNPA s plans calls for development of an offshore supplies base which will cost R14bn. SAS and CSS intend to bid for it .Fisher would like to see collaboration of another type. "Each of SA s shipbuilding and repair players has unique abilities," he says. "We must all collaborate.Maharaj agrees: "It will enable us to go into Africa as a united industry."