Is Samsung Mobile the new BlackBerry? Or the new Nokia? Or even the original cellphone maker Motorola? Samsung is the biggest maker of phones but it is showing characteristics, like all those one-time top dogs, that saw their fortunes slide.First came corporate arrogance, followed by a few missed quarters, then like the server outage that would ultimately destroy BlackBerry Samsung has just suffered a major disaster.Samsung sales were US$177bn last year and it is worth $200bn. Once you ve reached the top, there is only one way to go.Unless you constantly innovate and even Apple doesn t seem to be able to do that you can only maintain your status for so long. BlackBerry, which last month stopped manufacturing its own handsets, was once valued at $80bn. It s now worth $3.8bn.Perhaps what we are seeing is a realignment of the smartphone industry, as the Chinese midmarket upsets grow their numbers by offering cheaper handsets.Indeed, it is the likes of Huawei, Xiaomi, Hisense, Lenovo (and its recently acquired Motorola), and ZTE that are the biggest threats to Samsung. Without the high marketing costs that Samsung requires for its top-end handsets, these Chinese manufacturers offer a phone that is good enough for first-time buyers or those unable to afford anything pricier. Combine that with the odd quirk that people would rather own a top-end B-grade brand than a midrange A-class brand, and there are hundreds of millions of people who need cheaper smartphones.But it is not these harbingers of potential undercutting doom that Samsung was aiming for with the Note 7, the latest in the larger phablet category that it created with the Note in 2011.Samsung wanted to get the jump on its arch-rival Apple, whose iPhone 7s were due to be announced in September, while also skipping the Note 6 name to match its own Galaxy 7 range. But it has spectacularly backfired. Launched in August, the Note 7 began to smoulder, and later catch fire. Samsung quickly recalled about 2.5m devices at an estimated cost of $1bn but that process was undone when replacement handsets caught fire. It chose to scrap the phone completely.Meanwhile, signs began appearing at airline check-in counters warning people to turn their Note 7s off on the plane. Several European, Asian and American airlines have banned them outright. People don t forget that kind of thing. They will probably forget the "Note 7" part and merely associate "phones that catch fire" with Samsung. The reputational damage is immense. Fiddling while phone burns The Note 7 disaster wiped $23bn off Samsung s market value, while it is now expected to cost it $5bn or more in lost sales. Samsung has also been criticised for its communications campaign. Its public relations response to the six-week crisis was summed up, hilariously, by the Financial Times as "fiddling while phone burns".It s too soon to say if the Note 7 is Samsung Mobile s BlackBerry moment. It certainly seems so. But Samsung is a giant of a company, accounting for about a fifth of South Korea s economy; and makes everything from smartphones to semiconductors to petrochemicals to ships. It also accounts for a fifth of South Korea s exports. It s almost too big to fail. * Shapshak is editor-in-chief and publisher of Stuff magazine. Follow him on Twitter: @shapshak