Picture: ISTOCKSurf puts brightness on the line ... when the waves are in surf s up. There s no doubt that the word surf has cheerful implications. Surf now happens to also be the name of the new Sygnia umbrella retirement fund, though given the autocratic reputation of Sygnia CEO Magda Wierzycka, maybe the Serf Fund would have been more appropriate.It is not brand new: it was originally the Sechaba Umbrella Fund, which Sygnia acquired when it bought the Gallet Group in February. Sygnia has ambitions for Surf to take on the big five umbrella funds in SA Old Mutual, Sanlam, Liberty, Momentum and, most of all, Alexander Forbes. Surf has about 7,500 members compared with more than 300,000 at the Alexander Forbes Retirement Fund.For those who consider Wierzycka to be a bit too, let s say, showbiz, it was important to give the fund a couple of serious-looking frontmen. Sygnia hooked two big fish from Forbes David Hufton, who was the national head of institutional consulting, and John Anderson, the head of research. Hufton set out the case for Surf to me recently.There is no doubt that retirement funds are moving into umbrellas. It only makes sense for the very largest companies to maintain standalone funds, and even giants such as Anglo Platinum have collapsed into umbrellas. Many funds hide fees but the three main fees are for administration, consulting and, obviously, asset management. Surf has only one fee the asset management fee which in part is used to subsidise the other costs. If a fund member opts for the index-based funds the fee can be as low at 0.4%-0.6%. In most umbrellas, once costs are added up it can be as high as 3%. Sygnia has heard from clients that Old Mutual and Sanlam are going into new business pitches promising to waive administration fees for new clients though with their huge client bases it would be hard for them to waive fees on their legacy clients. I saw a lot of song and dance from Forbes about the in-fund preservation and living annuity options, which save money rather than shopping around for external options. This was introduced a few weeks after Sygnia s in-fund options. The preservation fund option isn t materially different from Alexander Forbes but Surf also offers three different options on retirement: none of the big five umbrellas offers more than one in-fund annuity.The Surf for life option is intriguing. It starts off as a living annuity (invested in a range of unit trusts), then after the first year 10% of the living annuity is used to buy a Surf life annuity. This is purchased through niche life office Just Retirement. Unlike the living annuity, the income from this product cannot fall.Competition on feesThen every year a further 10% is transferred over until, after 10 years, typically at age 75, the client is fully invested in a life annuity, in this case a with-profit annuity in which there are annual increases in the pension payout, depending on the performance of the underlying investments. Surf may be small but it has encouraged competition on fees. For years Forbes resisted in-fund annuities, arguing they would cannibalise the fees earned by Forbes retail advisers: they make 0.5%-1% every time they transfer a portfolio into an external preservation fund or annuity.One way Sygnia can keep costs down is by limited choice. I don t know how many options there are on, say, the Old Mutual Super Fund, but it s hundreds. Sygnia has four funds each in the active Signature range and the passive Skeleton range, with a target equity allocation of 70%, 60%, 50% or 40%. And it has four options for clients who want one of the large in-demand fund managers Foord, Investec, Coronation and Allan Gray. Maybe Dave Foord s swashbuckling style would be just the thing to add some spice to a worthy but bland Surf portfolio.But I can understand why Sygnia is so keen to limit choice. Apart from the extra cost of a wide range of options, it can be too easy to switch options at the wrong time.