Picture: FREDDY MAVUNDASoon there will be a new kid on the exchange s retail block. Dis-Chem s long-awaited appearance on the local bourse is finally going to take place."It marks the next stage in our development," says Lynette Saltzman, Dis-Chem MD and co-founder.Details will be made available only once Dis-Chem s pre listing statement is published.What is known is that there will be an injection of new capital to be used for repayment of existing debt and "general corporate purposes".Dis-Chem is readying itself for big things and has set an ambitious goal of doubling store numbers from the current 101 over the next five to eight years. That represents an annual addition of 13-20 new outlets. As with existing stores, all will have dispensaries and at least one clinic.Dis-Chem is already moving at a cracking pace, having added 30 new stores in the three years to February, but this would be a big acceleration of its growth plans.Expansion opportunities abound."An international research firm has identified 100 sites for us," says Saltzman. "We are a very desirable tenant."Providing an indication of where expansion will be, she continues: "We are well represented in Gauteng but not in the Western Cape and KwaZulu Natal." Indeed, there are only three Dis-Chem stores in Cape Town and two in Durban.In its expansion Dis-Chem will adhere to its "big box" store strategy.Dis-Chem s new shop in Centurion will be a 3,000m giant. Its average store size is 1,500m to 1,800m . "We will not go below 1,000m ," says Saltzman.For Dis-Chem, as with any drugstore format, the dispensary is the loss leader, used to draw customers into stores. The profit machine is the front store, where Dis-Chem is moving increasingly into the dry grocery and health-food segments."I suspect Dis-Chem is taking market share from food market chains," says independent retail analyst Syd Vianello.In addition to pharmaceutical products and services, Dis-Chem s retail pharmacies also sell personal care, beauty, nutrition and baby care products, as well as confectionery, household and other ancillary products.In its race for space and sales growth Dis-Chem is also going head to head with Clicks, which, through its Clicks store chain, had 496 stores at the end of February, of which 384 had pharmacies.But unlike Dis-Chem, Clicks has only about 60 big-format stores. It has a convenience-store strategy facilitating far broader coverage of its target market.In a recent interview, Clicks CEO David Kneale told the Financial Mail: "We will open 20-25 stores every year for the foreseeable future. Our target is 600 stores, but I think we can do substantially more."From a financial size perspective, Clicks is ahead of Dis-Chem. Revenue wise, Clicks reported retail sales in the six months to February of R12.1bn.In the 12 months to February Dis-Chem reported revenue of R15.5bn, but this included an undisclosed sum from its CJ Distribution business. Profit wise, Clicks is also clearly ahead of Dis-Chem at the retail level, having generated annualised retail profit before tax of R1.25bn to February, compared with Dis-Chem s retail earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation (Ebitda) of about R990m.Saltzman says she and her husband, Ivan, Dis-Chem CEO and co-founder, will remain materially invested in the company. "Dis-Chem is our life and passion," she says, though the listing, through a share placement with institutions, provides the couple with an opportunity to cash in a portion of their 66.9% stake.Dis-Chem is fast closing the gap between it and Clicks . In the 36 months to February it grew Ebitda at 21.6%/year, well ahead of the 10%/year pace delivered by Clicks.It makes Dis-Chem a company likely to command a rating at least on par with Clicks s heady p:e of 28.