Picture: ISTOCKBruce s List: A guide to informed reads.If you thought SA was just being badly run by a bunch of people lacking in experience and judgment, think again. The reporting and events of the past few days have made it all much clearer. We are being run by a syndicate of villains. All of the reporting the harassment of an SA Revenue Service (Sars) lawyer, Vlok Symington, by so-called policemen at his offices who were trying to recover evidence that not even Sars own lawyers agreed with the fraud complaint laid against finance minister Pravin Gordhan by the Sars boss (and Zuma brown-nose) Tom Moyane; the revelation that David Des van Rooyen, appointed finance minister last December 9, had visited the Gupta family home seven days in a row directly prior to his appointment (he was getting instructions and being allocated advisers ); and the detailed, breathtaking reporting of just how the syndicate launders its money and takes it offshore tells us the most uncomfortable of truths. The state, or large parts of it, is captured by gangsters.The question of treason arises. If Jacob Zuma is aware of some of the looting and plotting now being revealed then he may be guilty of actively and deliberately undermining the country and the constitution. It is hard to believe though, that an elected political leader, however rotten his administration may be, would deliberately sell his country to the highest bidder. But how, then, do you explain this report on money laundering from the investigative unit amaBhungane. What it describes is economic sabotage and, I suspect, it is merely the tip of the iceberg. Take your time and concentrate. This is important. Remember also that Salim Essa is more than just a business associate. He is, if anything, the brains behind many of the tricks the Guptas get up to. The Guptas helped him get big Transnet contracts and it is he who has tried to run off with Denel s rights to sell its weapons systems in Asia: amaBhungane: State Capture The Guptas and the R250 million kickback laundry unpacked in full.And you gotta love the sheer audacity of Van Rooyen. He must have thought Christmas had come early when he realised he was being groomed as finance minister by the president s close friends the Guptas and all the exciting chat and stuff. This all started about a year ago, just after deputy finance minister Mcebisi Jonas had turned down a Gupta offer to become finance minister. Much of the associated e-mails doing the rounds as Van Rooyen was being groomed concerned ideas about getting second-tier municipalities into the debt markets. Ho, ho, ho, laughed Father Christmas. You could imagine how Essa s Trillian Capital was going to get stuck in, in extracting fees and commissions from the Mthathas and the Grahamstowns for arranging debt they can t afford. Little wonder Van Rooyen was moved to local government after his lightning stint at treasury ... it s because the idea is still alive! Here s the Sunday Times lead from yesterday, in the unlikely event you might have missed it: Van Rooyen visited Guptas 7 days in a row prior to appointment as finance minister.As I write we re waiting for poor old Shaun Abrahams, the luckless national director of public prosecutions to announce whether or not he is going to proceed with charges of fraud against Pravin Gordhan on Wednesday. It is hard to believe he ll press ahead but then he is obviously not the brightest bulb in the chandelier, so anything could happen. Just as anything could happen between now and November 8 to Hillary Clinton, whose lax handling of her e-mails during her time as US secretary of state continues to dog her campaign for the US presidency. Quite what FBI director James Comey had in mind when he wrote to congress saying he was going to re-open his agency s investigation into Clinton s e-mails is not clear. He hasn t seen a new e-mail and he just thinks there might be some in a huge stack of mails found on the laptop of one Anthony Weiner, a politician who is accused of sending photos of his private parts to young girls. His estranged wife works for Clinton. But the affair has hurt her campaign and boosted Donald Trump s chances of beating her, God forbid. Here s the latest on the story from The New York Times: Justice department obtains warrant to review Clinton aide s emails.It is hard to know exactly how badly Clinton has been damaged by the new probe. A New York Times poll in Florida today has Trump taking the lead. It is a key state for him, though not necessarily for her. But I liked this short comment on why she has no-one to blame but herself: FBI put in impossible position by Clinton chicanery.And in the UK there is much discussion about the future of the governor of the Bank of England, whose independence has been threatened by the new UK Prime Minister Theresa May. Here s a thoughtful piece from David Marsh, who heads an institution called OMFIF (Google it and sign up for their e-mails), which does a lot of work around the world with central bankers: Carney, May and the sterling imbroglio. Marsh will have been relieved to read the Financial Times lead this morning. Governor Mark Carney, it seems, is not going anywhere: Mark Carney stands ready to serve 8-year term at Bank of England (paywall).