Picture: ISTOCKIn the fluid world of executive remuneration, some things appear to be certain. First, that whatever happens to earnings, share prices or the economy, pay will trend upwards. Second, that after a period of public indignation, executives will be left alone to ponder their growing wealth.The latest indignation fest has been prompted by news of the R100m in salary and shares paid to Shoprite CEO Whitey Basson.The problem is that executive remuneration isn t a science. If it were, Basson would probably not get R100m but he would still almost certainly get an awful lot more than mostother CEOs.Of course, the notion of "peers" is tricky because, despite all the talk, there s not really an effective market for CEOs. Nonetheless, it is safe to say that Basson has few peers only the likes of Bidvest s Brian Joffe, Discovery s Adrian Gore, Aspen s Stephen Saad or Capitec s Michiel le Roux would truly qualify.In practice, this means that if Shoprite chairman Christo Wiese were thinking of popping into the market for a replacement CEO, he would be unlikely to find one as effective as Basson. This is all the justification he needs to pay Basson hefty amounts.It s not that CEOs aren t valuable. Even the common or garden variety of CEO that runs our listed companies is valuable. It s just that they are valuable in the same sense that diamonds are: not as valuable as they think nor quite as valuable as the money "buyers" pay to get them.It s an interesting comparison, considering that the market for executives over the past 15 years mirrors what happened in the diamond market in the 1940s in Europe and the US. This was a period when De Beers shut off most of the supply of diamonds to the global market, while simultaneously launching a powerful marketing campaign to create the impression of great rarity and value.Once a company has paid the CEO s salary, it becomes complicit in justifying it. This is evident from the remuneration details in annual reports equivalent to the gushing fianc explaining why the diamond engagement ring he bought is so valuable. The answer is circular: it is so valuable because an awful lot of money has been spent on it.It is increasingly difficult not to believe that either the executive supply and storyline are being manipulated, or the market is remarkably inefficient. What other service has been able to demand ever-increasing prices over such a sustained period?In most markets, excessive prices lead to a greater supply. But this isn t happening with executives, despite mushrooming business schools.There s also the matter of the re-sale value of top executives. Poaching in the lower ranks is rife, we re told. But few CEOs have skipped from one company to another for an increase. Perhaps that would be like buying a slightly used diamond.Maybe it is time to call in the competition authorities?