Poor management at Eskom South African Airways (SAA) the Post Office state railway operator Prasa and the South African National Road Agency Limited (Sanral) has cost South Africans dearly and placed strain on the economy the treasury has admitted.In supporting documentation to the medium-term budget policy statement delivered by finance minister Pravin Gordhan in parliament the treasury states that these state-owned companies could pose risks to the country s public finances.Further key interventions are foreseen especially in the cases of the SAA the Post Office Sanral and Eskom.SAA gets no praise from the treasury. Its new board simply gets tasked with returning the airline to financial sustainability and filling vacant management positions. No progress in this regard is recorded.The Post Office board is complimented on raising money to repay creditors and reducing strikes.Sanral s new tolling dispensation and those not paying e-tolls stand forewarned that they will face legal action. Treasury is closely monitoring the way in which Sanral is being managed.Treasury believes Eskom s recapitalisation process has improved both its liquidity and profitability.At the same time Eskom accounts for almost three quarters of contingent liability costs accruing to government from poorly managed state owned companies the power producer having built up exposure of more than R200 billion. Most of this exposure is due to the obligation on Eskom to buy power from independent power producers for the next twenty years. Should the power utility fail to do so the state must step in and honour the commitment somehow.The fiscus has committed R53 billion to Prasa mostly to buy new rolling stock (trains). Weak expenditure controls and contract management has however meant that the programme is unlikely to be finalised on time and within budget. Furthermore expected declines in Prasa s fare revenue and passenger numbers are reasons for concern.Fiscal exposure to Sanral debt reached R35bn fuelled by public refusal to pay e-tolls. Treasury is clear that refusal to pay e-tolls will lead to a deterioration in roads.SAA continues to post losses. Without continued state bail-outs at the taxpayers expense SAA is technically insolvent.The Post Office has exposed the state to the tune of R4 4 billion but is improving.The Land Bank and the Road Accident Fund also remain poorly managed.State-owned companies will struggle to be bailed out in future. It will only happen consistent with sustainable public finances . Capitalisation will not be done in a way that will increase the budget deficit and further bail-outs will only be granted on the back of sound business plans treasury said.TMG Parliament