The Tshimologong Precinct: turning Braamfontein into a digital hubThe next big thing in tech isn t going to happen in mum and dad s garage. It isn t even the domain of big corporations. Exciting spaces like technology hubs and digital precincts in cities around the world hold far better prospects.That is the view of Prof Barry Dwolatzky, who heads the University of the Witwatersrand s Jo burg Centre for Software Engineering. He has worked for years to establish a digital precinct in Johannesburg."Silicon Braamfontein", officially named Tshimologong Precinct ("new beginnings" in Setswana), might not have the glitz, glam, sea or a TV show about the struggles of building a start-up from scratch. But it has the potential to become a digital innovation centre that can nurture young SA startups.Global tech giants are slowly moving into Braamfontein s bustling streets. IBM, Cisco and Microsoft have established a presence there while Telkom has moved in among them.The establishment of the precinct is the first step in the creation of a digital economy in SA to drive innovation in software, hardware and content, Dwolatzky says."The digital economy is driven by this amazing wave of innovation that moves rapidly, that is multidisciplinary and is potentially very disruptive; that is the nature of the digital world," he says.Dwolatzky expects to see an explosion in software, content as well as hardware innovation, such as digital devices in clothing, to self-driving cars.Much of this will take place in developed countries. The Boston Consulting Group says the Internet economy is the second-biggest economic contributor to GDP in the UK, behind property. It expects the Internet economy to contribute 12.4% to the UK GDP this year.But SA can t afford to allow digital innovation to be brought in from abroad. Digital hubs in the East End of London, in Cambridge, Massachusetts and even in Nairobi, Kenya already have a lead.SA needs to catch up. But where will the local hub be located? The knee-jerk reaction is to head for Cape Town, says Dwolatzky. But digital zones should be situated in a business area, near "digital natives" and close to a big university. That makes Johannesburg perfect, even if Dwolatzky concedes that Cape Town already has a lead.It is the home of Bandwidth Barn, part of the Cape Innovation &amp; Technology Initiative. Operating since 2000, the Barn helps startups like Tutorfy, which plans to apply the Uber model to tutoring. Another is Educade, which wants to introduce apps into classrooms.Other competition includes Workshop 17, also in Cape Town and Stellenbosch University s LaunchLab, which has been a hub of entrepreneurial activity.To support the creation of a hub in Braamfontein, tech firms have also committed finance. IBM has invested R700m on a research laboratory in the precinct. The lab s director Solomon Assefa says: "It s all about the formation of an ecosystem. If you want to advance innovation then you want to be able to engage start-ups with students, post-docs, scientists in a space so they can innovate together."City officials are also involved. Executive director of economic development in the City of Johannesburg, Ravi Naidoo, would like to see investment of between R30bn and R40bn in Braamfontein over the next 15 years. The funds will be sourced from the private and public sector, Naidoo says. The city has invested in a broadband network in Braamfontein which services the precinct.Johannesburg economic development MMC Sharon Peetz says Braamfontein s technology hub will have to compete with the rest of the world for investment.Critical to its success will be public-private partnerships, and a change in mindset. If SA cities embrace it, the potential for growth, jobs and innovation could dispel the misgivings of even the most cynical among us.