What makes a will a legal and binding document? Kura Chihota and SmartRand executive Warren Ingram give some insight on the topic in this week s episode of Smart Money.Death is a certainty for everyone, yet most people deem it unpleasant to talk about. The reality is that planning around your death will protect your legacy and ensure that your spouse and your dependants are well taken care of.A will is not just for the wealthy but is a crucial legal document for anyone with assets, a spouse and dependants.If you die without a will in SA you leave behind a lot of problems for your family, says Ingram. The default position upon your death will give an estate organisation the power to divide your assets among your family as they see fit."You re leaving behind a terrible legacy and an incredible amount of problems," says Ingram. He says in his own experience of speaking to people as a financial adviser, 50% of people do not have a will, and of those who do not have a will, many have children. "A will is the most important document that you will ever sign in your life," says Madeleine Schubert, executive director of Sentinel Trust. Without a will, everything you have worked your whole life to build falls flat, she says.The first step to planning around your death would be to get a valid will. It has to be witnessed, signed and dated by someone other than a beneficiary of your assets. Speak to a financial adviser to help you decide how you want your assets allocated. Most importantly, nominate a guardian that you trust to look after your children when you die.Schubert says a valid will must also include the following: Your marital status and type of nuptial contract, i.e. in community of property or out of community of property with accrual Country of nuptial agreement, because different countries have different legislation and systems Physical address at time of death, because that determines the jurisdiction of the master that is going to look after your documents. A will does not have be a complicated or lengthy document. People often want to rule from the grave but that is not always possible for the people left behind with the estate, says Schubert.Keep it "reasonably simple and principled rather than too detailed and specific on the allocation of your assets," she says. This will also help to minimise squabbles within your family.The next step is to elect an executor. This is the person who will allocate your assets and pay off any outstanding debts. Dating your will is crucial and often overlooked, says Schubert. Failure to do so will deem it useless and previous versions of the will override what is written in it.Make sure you review your will at least every 2-3 years and at every major life event such as at a marriage, divorce and birth of a child.Lastly, Schubert says you have to inform your current executor that all previous drafted wills are revoked to prevent any possible conflicts the may arise from different versions of your will.Schubert explains the importance of guardian clauses in your will if you have dependants. Smart Money airs on Business Day TV channel 412