David Maynier. Picture MARK CAMERON/BUSINESS DAY WANTEDAmazingly, after resisting efforts by the DA s David Maynier with all manner of specious arguments for five long months, last week the Public Investment Corp (PIC ) provided even more detail of its unlisted investments than it had been asked for.Full marks to the PIC for that.The public, thanks to Maynier s determination, was given sight not only of the names of the 250 investments in the PIC s Isibaya Fund but also of the amounts involved and, much more importantly, the names of specific directors.For example, did anyone outside the PIC and the board of Independent News &amp; Media realise the extent to which oversight of the media company was a family affair? There are no fewer than three members of the Surv family on the company s board Iqbal, Saarah and Fatima. Despite being the main funder, the PIC managed to secure only one appointment to the board.To date the Independent has been the most controversial of the PIC s unlisted investments, though at R1.3bn it is far from the largest. It is dwarfed by the investment in AfriSam, which runs to several billion rand and is in the same ballpark as the US$100m committed to Irene Charnley s telecommunications company Smile.That neither AfriSam nor Smile is as politically sensitive as a media company may protect them from the same level of scrutiny.The PIC picked up a 25% stake in Independent for just R166.3m in August 2013. Its main exposure is in the form of loans worth R1.1bn. The largest of these loans, R579.7m, appears to have been made to an entity that had only one director, Iqbal Surv . About R323.7m of this loan, due to be repaid in full by August 2018, has been paid back. There s been no repayment on any of the other loans.Though the PIC has written down the value of its Independent equity, it has revalued (upwards) all its loans. This allows it to report a healthy return on its Independent investment despite the uncertainty facing the industry in general and this company in particular.There may be similar concerns about some of Isibaya s other investments. Its internal rate of return is based on the assumed market valuation of investments in unlisted assets. Though extensive analysis goes into determining these valuations, at the end of the day they may be only as reliable as the international rating agencies valuations of the subprime mortgage loans were before the 2008 global financial crisis.At least the public now has a better feel for the situation. And, as Maynier said, the fact that this information has been made public is significant because it creates the expectation that it will be disclosed in the future. "This will be a major disincentive to rent seekers with political influence from trying to raid the PIC."With a huge R1.8trillion kitty, the PIC is, as Today s Trustee magazine editor Allan Greenblo said, a sitting duck for state capture and rent seeking. Until last week the most vulnerable part of that sitting duck was the Isibaya Fund, which targeted so-called developmental projects.For aspiring rent seekers or state capturers, Isibaya s most attractive feature was that it invested in unlisted entities. As Greenblo pointed out, an investment of R1bn or so can easily become obscured in a portfolio of the PIC s size. In the coming weeks interested parties will no doubt be picking through the long list of board members for rent-seeking alarm bells.As Maynier suggested, disclosure of the names might discourage the more egregious forms of state capture.It should also help to take pressure off the PIC to dole out money to political cronies.