Picture: GALLO IMAGES/BEELD/FELIX DLANGAMANDLAWhat it means: If academic lectures do not resume in a week, the entire academic year could be lost.Students around SA have continued with Fees Must Fall protests, despite the risk of not being able to complete the 2016 academic year. But, for some, it might be a price too high.The protests, which came after higher education minister Blade Nzimande s announcement last month of a fee increase, have shut down almost every higher education institution in SA. Nzimande said institutions can decide on their own fee increases for 2017, but he recommended that these be capped at 8%.Despite the minister s promise that poor and "missing-middle" students with a household income of R600,000 and less would be subsidised, students took to the streets. They are demanding government find the money for free education and have rejected studies to determine whether this is feasible, saying they know government can fund free education, but there is no political will to do so.Last Friday, students at the Vaal University of Technology in Vanderbijlpark gathered in small groups on the campus. It had been a tumultuous week. At least 17 were arrested and SRC president Troy Mathebula was expelled after clashes with police. These followed violent protests that resulted in buildings on campus being set alight.However, it seems the momentum of the protests has died down andstudents are going about their business at the heavily guarded university."When I thought about varsity, most definitely [my thought was] not what s happening now," says first-year multimedia student Mzwakhe Gadebe. "I thought varsity was about studying, free Wi-Fi ... having fun with your friends."Gadebe agrees students should fight for free higher education and says government can afford it, but he believes students should approach the issue differently . "I m part of the struggle ... but the way we re doing it now is bad. People need to graduate this year, some need to finish their diplomas. We cannot, because of how some people think. "He says he could lose his National Student Financial Aid Scheme funding if he doesn t complete the year, and he does not have enough money to pay for his own education.Lerato Bafana M bele, who is studying towards a diploma in policy, agrees with him. He says he is worried about not being able to complete the year.Gadebe also has complaints about the lack of leadership at the university, saying student leaders could be playing a bigger role."Everyone is trying to prove themselves [as] the perfect leader ... in doing that they confuse students," he says.Mbele and Gadebe s uncertain academic future is shared by thousands of students across the country.Earlier this month, Wits University vice-chancellor Adam Habib said public hospitals would have 1,600 fewer doctors in January 2017 if the academic year does not resume. He also said the engineering and financial sectors would be hard hit, affecting SA s already weak economy.Wits has been at the centre of the protests, with students clashing with police, damaging property, burning buildings and looting shops in Braamfontein. Eleven students were arrested as a result.Last Friday Wits spokesman Shirona Patel said the university needs about two weeks to finish the academic programme before exams can begin.She said if the programme were cancelled for the rest of the year, 7,000 first-year students would not be able to study at Wits next year. The lost year would also result in new teachers, doctors, lawyers and accountants being unable to enter the job market because they would not have written board exams.Students who rely on financial aid, scholarships and bursaries also face an uncertain future, Patel said.However, Misheck Mugabe, treasurer-general of the SA Union of Students, says anyone telling students their future is in jeopardy is inciting fear, because there is at least a two-week window in which students can continue protesting before they lose the year."It is about disempowering them [students] so that they don t fight for the cause," says Mugabe. He adds that the union is hoping to resolve the fees issue for all universities in SA in the next two weeks.Mugabe says the union understands that free education will not happen overnight, but it wants a commitment from government to work on funding free education. If it doesn t at least get that, the protests will continue.The treasurer-general dismissed allegations that student leaders are using the protests to further their political ambitions.