What it means: Domestic producers need to up their game in the face of a challenge from the US.Chicken producers in SA are like the current Springboks: on the back foot, defensive (but entirely inadequate in defence) and outplayed in every facet of the modern international game.In an era of globalisation they continue to want industry protection to deal with the rand, which fluctuates wildly, and to halt a flood of foreign chicken imports.But the Americans are coming. They don t brine much, nor plump up their birds with hormones or anything other than breeding and feeding through scientific methods.This means domestic chicken producers need to up their game and not rely on a measly 65,000t/year quota imposed on US chicken imports by the International Trade Administration Commission of SA.The domestic industry needs to be competitive without relying on the abstract and perhaps impossible notion of attaining a level playing field in the hurly-burly of world trade. But it will not become so if it continues to inject up to 40% of brine into its products, says James Sumner, president of the USA Poultry &amp; Egg Export Council (USApeec).Brine is a salt-water concoction that, domestic producers rather unconvincingly claim, tenderises chicken meat and generally adds taste."We would never consider that and would not be allowed to do that by our government," Sumner says. "I think it is unfair on SA consumers being sold water at the price of chicken."Sumner s remarks come as new brining regulations come into force in SA. They impose a cap of 15% brine on individually quick-frozen portions of chicken and 10% on whole birds. Some countries, like Brazil, ban brining entirely, while others limit brining to 8% of the chicken s weight.Jim Wayt managing director of Intervision Foods, one of the largest US exporters of frozen animal proteins, and USApeec s immediate past chairman says brining is at a maximum of 15% for specified US chicken customers, but is usually only found at levels of about 2%.The vexed issue of brining indicates some of the underlying issues at play in world poultry markets.SA, after protracted negotiations on the renewal of the US African Growth &amp; Opportunity Act (Agoa), agreed to the import of 65,000t/year of bone-in US chicken , free of anti-dumping duties.But US poultry imports into SA still draw standard duties of 37%, against zero tariffs for EU member countries, which collectively are big exporters.After more than 15 years of being locked out of SA chicken markets on claims of dumping, the Americans are now hungry for a greater share.Sumner s remarks are also a pointed rebuttal to the SA Poultry Association (Sapa), headed by Kevin Lovell, which claims chicken imports are killing the local industry and wants tariffs imposed to "level the playing field"."Sapa don t want to level the playing field for poultry," says Sumner, "they want to control it."Indeed, the gloves are off between the US and SA poultry industries. International trade is a proxy for tit-for-tat politics. The Americans have used chicken imports to SA as a stick to beat the country with during Agoa negotiations.The US does not sell whole chickens, Sumner says. Rather, the sum of the parts is greater than the whole.Lovell says "low-cost" exported US chicken is unpalatable, dumped, dark-meat "waste" that has phytosanitary issues, including harbouring salmonella bacteria, which is easily cooked out of food.Sumner counters that the biggest problem for SA-produced chicken is Newcastle disease. This acute infectious viral fever affects birds, especially poultry. But it can be vaccinated against, and poses little hazard to human health.USApeec says the US department of agriculture (USDA) is regarded as the highest authority on food inspection in the world, and that a USDA stamp signifies that a poultry product is of the highest quality and eligible for export.Asked if he thinks US producers might one day invest in the SA chicken industry, Wayt says there have been discussions around this, but nothing has been agreed to."Maybe when we move from a Lovell playing field to a level playing field," he wryly observes, referring to Lovell s perceived intransigence when it comes to free trade in poultry.But he also says there are many risks to investing including diseases such as avian influenza and that such a process is complicated and time-consuming.Sumner says the share of US chicken imports to SA stands at less than 10% at present, and that SA producers are well protected from US products. "I think they have adequate protection with 37% duty on top of landed costs. We are not just next door."Sumner acknowledges a "bad attitude" in relations between producers in the two countries on this issue, and says both are playing "hardball". He wants Sapa to see USApeec as "complementing" the domestic chicken market by adding variety for low-income consumers and "not stealing it" from SA producers.Distribution of half the 65,000t/year of US chicken imports into SA is reserved for historically disadvantaged people. However, many have little experience in the industry and are being sent to the US for training, while also benefiting from department of trade &amp; industry initiatives in SA.Sumner says the process is "difficult and needs work". Meanwhile, US chicken imports to SA are much lower than the quota. "That might be why we are not fulfilling the whole quota to SA because of the limitations," he says.But SA Association of Meat Importers &amp; Exporters CEO David Wolpert says the main reason US bone-in chicken imports have been disappointing is that importers are still bringing in products from the EU because they can get duty-free, high-quality chicken meat under existing trade agreements.Brazil is the biggest exporter of chicken, followed by the US. Together they account for about two-thirds of global chicken meat exports, Sumner says. He adds that SA is the fifth-largest importer of chicken meat, "probably because of [its] high cost of production".Sapa says SA imported 288,000t of chicken in the first half of 2016. Imports from the Netherlands, Britain and Spain made up about 35% of this. Brazil made up 43.2%. The US took a 5.3% share of the market in the period.Meanwhile, Poland, one of the biggest and cheapest chicken producers in the EU, has recently completed paperwork to enter SA markets, adding to competitive pressures.Rainbow Chicken, one of SA s largest producers, says more than 1,000 jobs at its Camperdown factory in KwaZulu Natal are threatened by the glut of cheap poultry imports. RCL Foods, which owns Rainbow, has served formal notice of its intention to retrench workers.Lovell says more than 130,000 jobs, including some in adjacent industries, are potentially under threat. The domestic poultry industry consumes about 90% of soya grown in SA and is the biggest consumer of yellow maize.But senator Christopher Coons of Delaware, one of the largest chicken-producing states in the US, has a similar problem. He says poultry exports bring jobs for the US. He had wanted to block Agoa until SA acceded to US demands."Delaware is home to the modern American poultry industry. It is a model ... for widespread employment."Coons says SA is the "anchor" of a rapidly growing continent and is the key for developing US-Africa agricultural opportunities, especially in the Southern African Development Community."There were, of course, some tensions and challenges between the US and SA leading up to Agoa. SA has benefited most from Agoa," Coons says. The agreement allowed 90% of SA exports into the US duty free for the past 15 years.SA trade &amp; industry minister Rob Davies has said that Agoa has been positive for SA and the US alike. In 2015, total trade between the two nations registered at R155bn.Davies has said that the previous anti-dumping duty on chicken portions from the US was underpinned by consumption patterns in developed and developing countries. Consumers in the developed world eat mostly white chicken meat such as breast, while dark-meat products are exported and sold at below the cost of production in SA.* The writer was a recent guest of USApeec in the US