Picture: LCR CAPITALTertiary education in South Africa is in the spotlight as students across the country protest for #FeesMustFall, seeking free education and the scrapping of student debt. Campuses from the University of Johannesburg to the Cape Peninsula University of Technology have erupted as hotspots of unlawful demonstrations, mass action, intimidation and, at times, violence.This has led to the suspension of classes and disruptions to the academic year, with some universities stating that students may be unable to finish their 2016 studies. The consequences may be significant, not least for students who may suffer setbacks in entering the job market.International study is thus becoming more attractive. Yet in the US, for instance, many universities are capping the number of foreign students that a campus can accommodate.Holders of an EB-5 visa, however, are treated as US citizens and can enter that country s tertiary education system the same way locals do, greatly increasing their chances of acquiring a globally recognised Harvard, Penn or Columbia education, among others.The EB-5 investor visa is administered through the US Citizenship and Immigration Services. It enables South Africans with $500,000 to invest in local US business development to obtain a green card for themselves and their immediate family members to the US.Popular in China, Brazil and India, the programme has recently become available to South Africans through LCR Capital. Launched locally in August this year, it helps high-net-worth clients in emerging markets acquire permanent US residency. On obtaining an EB-5, South Africans can immigrate [into the US], buy property, set up a business and send their children to top schools and universities across the country at reduced in-state tuition. Fees can be significantly lower over a four-year period for US citizens than for foreigners, says Joe Haggenmiller, chief operating officer at LCR Capital.EB-5 visa holders may also qualify for merit-based scholarships and awards reserved for US residents and citizens.Only 10,000 EB-5s are made available worldwide by the US government each year. To obtain one as a South African, $500,000 is invested by LCR Capital into US-based businesses to create jobs in that country. LCR EB-5 investments are focused on providing senior, secured borrowing options to Dunkin Donuts franchisees in the US, says Haggenmiller.Dunkin Donuts is a listed, quick-service restaurant chain that mainly sells coffee (second only to Starbucks in the US). It is the seventh-largest chain in the US and the company has representation in 36 countries. It recently launched in South Africa.The EB-5 programme is supported by both main US political parties, as it creates jobs for US workers at no expense to the taxpayer.If approved, South Africans receive a temporary US green card within 12 to 18 months and a permanent one two to three years later.To help interested South Africans acquire an EB-5 for themselves and/or their children, LCR Capital, together with Grant Thornton and Fragomen Immigration Specialists, will host workshops in Johannesburg, Cape Town and Durban between October 24 and 28. Guests are welcome to attend at no charge the one-hour presentation sessions or request a private meeting with the tax, legal and immigration experts.To register, visit LCR Capital s South African website and complete the registration form or sign up below. LCR Capital was established in 2012 and its senior management team has an established track record, having served at many of the world s premier organisations: McKinsey &amp; Co, Credit Suisse, UBS and the US Congress, among others.For more information visit www.greencards.co.za or www.lcrcapital.com.This article was paid for by LCR Capital.